<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-model href="http://www.tei-c.org/release/xml/tei/custom/schema/relaxng/tei_all.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?>
<?xml-model href="http://www.tei-c.org/release/xml/tei/custom/schema/relaxng/tei_all.rng" type="application/xml"
	schematypens="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">William Slany Report on Informal HAC Meeting, January
                    1988</title>
                <title type="short">Slany Informal HAC Meeting Report, January 1988</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <date type="posted" when="2014-02-24">February 24, 2014</date>
                <date type="created" when="1988-01-11">January 11, 1988</date>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p>A scan of the original document is available for download (<ref
                        target="1988-01-11-slany-notes-on-informal-hac-meeting.pdf">PDF</ref>, 416
                    KB, 2pp.)</p>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <body>
            <p><hi rend="italic">Source: Department of State, Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of
                    the Historian, Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation Files,
                    1957-1990 (Lot File 96 D 292), Box 5, Correspondence-1988. Drafted by Deputy
                    Historian Neal H. Petersen (PA/HO).</hi></p>
            <p>Cited in <hi rend="italic">Toward “Thorough, Accurate, and Reliable”: A History of
                    the Foreign Relations of the United States Series</hi>, Chapter 10, <ref
                    target="../chapter-10#fn36">Footnote 36</ref></p>
            <div type="document">
                <head>WZS Report on Results of Advisory Committee Meeting</head>
                <dateline>January 11, 1988</dateline>
                <p>WZS met with the Committee at a hotel after the Friday session of the regular
                    meeting was snowed out. He reported the following to FR managers on Monday.</p>
                <p>The FRAC is very dubious about the utility of an intelligence supplement. NHP
                    should draft a more complete justification statement.</p>
                <p>The FRAC wants an updated version of the 60-by-90 schedule. WZS wants a new
                    version rather than an updated version of the old schedule, which is now
                    overtaken by events. NHP should prepare the new schedule.</p>
                <p>The FRAC is receptive to the idea of expert review of volumes at the planning
                    stage and then again at the pre-publication stage. HO needs to devise a
                    plan.</p>
                <p>The FRAC wants to weigh in on the matter of the structure of the series. It is
                    inclined toward comprehensiveness, in at least providing information on file
                    location for all significant subjects. Members are turned off by the idea of not
                    covering lesser subjects in any manner. This will be discussed at the November
                    meeting. We will want to devise detailed tables of contents for the 1961-1963
                    volumes.</p>
                <p>Some of the members are skeptical about microfiche. Some prefer microfilm. We
                    need to integrate microfiche supplements into our overall planning in order to
                    better explain it to the FRAC.</p>
                <p>With regard to CDC and declassification, the Committee liked the CDC
                    presentation, particularly Sober’s. Members still want to see withheld documents
                    and the guidelines developed for NARA reviewers, but most feel that this year’s
                    meeting was a step forward.</p>
                <p>Perkins will address a letter to Redman on the failure of the Department to
                    follow up on his meeting with Spiers in 1987. He will stress the need for
                    dialogue and indicate that the Committee is not wedded to the concept of an
                    “ombudsman” to monitor declassification.</p>
                <p>The Committee was not much concerned with the decompiling process, feeling that
                    was our business.</p>
                <p>Most of the above was discussed with Redman and High at a meeting on Friday
                    January 8.</p>
                <p>There was agreement that the next Advisory Committee meeting would be held in
                    November.</p>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
