<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1992-07-23">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, July
                    1992</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1992</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1992-07-23">July 23, 1992</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <body>
            <pb n="1" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section" xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation_1">
                <head>ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTATION July 23-24,
                    1992</head>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Committee members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Warren Kimball, Chairman</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Betty Glad</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>George Herring</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Anna Nelson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Bradford Perkins</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jane Picker</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Emily Rosenberg</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Arnold Taylor</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>G. Alfred Kennedy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Susan
                            Povenmire</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Office of the Historian</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>William Z. Slany</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>James E. Miller</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Glenn W. LaFantasie</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Rita M. Baker</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Paul Claussen</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Taylor Fain</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Vicki E. Futscher</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Nina Howland</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Edward C. Keefer</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David W. Mabon</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Nina J. Noring</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Harriet D. Schwar</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Charles S. Sampson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Shirley Taylor</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Joe Chaddic, Chief, Historical Documents Review Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>William C. Hamilton, Historical Documents Review Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeanne Pryor, Historical Documents Review Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>T. George Tsukahira, Historical Documents Review Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Philip Valdes, Historical Documents Review Division</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>John F. Scott, Deputy Director of the Office of Japanese
                        Affairs</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Office of the Legal Adviser</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Robert E. Dalton, Assistant Legal Adviser</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Trudy Peterson, Assistant Archivist</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>George Chalou</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David Langbart</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Marilyn McLennan, Director of Services Operations Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeanne Schauble</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0002"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--july-23--9-45-10-30-a-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, July 23, 9:45-10:30 a.m.</hi></head>
                <p>Chairman Warren Kimball called the meeting to order at 9:45 a.m. The classified
                    portion of the minutes of the previous meeting was distributed to the Committee
                    for its approval.</p>
                <p>Deputy Assistant Secretary George Kennedy welcomed the Committee on behalf of
                    Assistant Secretary Tutwiler. He said the Department of State takes its
                    commitment to a 30-year line very seriously. PA is making sure the Historian’s
                    Office has all the resources it needs to publish the projected volumes. He
                    expressed PA’s continuing concern with the delay in the declassification of the
                    remaining volumes for the Eisenhower administration. He stated that the logjam
                    has to be broken. PA is ready to take on responsibility for the coordination of
                    declassification provided that it can have the additional resources that would
                    be necessary. He also stressed the need for collective management of the
                    process.</p>
                <p>The Committee then approved the minutes of the previous meeting and approved the
                    draft agenda subject to change.</p>
                <p>Department of State Historian and Executive Secretary of the Committee William Z.
                    Slany gave his report on the status of the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series that had been sent to Committee members previously. He
                    noted that HO anticipates the publication of 13-14 volumes in FY 1992, exceeding
                    its goal, and foresees publication of another dozen volumes in FY 1993,
                    including most of the remaining Eisenhower administration volumes. The PA Bureau
                    has made every effort to provide the necessary funding for publication,
                    including the transfer of resources within PA.</p>
                <p>Kimball pointed out that at this rate of publication, the series will not reach
                    the 30-year line for 5 years; the 3-5 years permitted by the legislation seems
                    to have slipped to 5 years. He questioned whether the Committee should call
                    attention to this. Anna Nelson suggested discussing this at the Friday afternoon
                    session. Bradford Perkins suggested that the Committee might want to look at
                    some volumes that had been in declassification an inordinately long time. It was
                    agreed to discuss this suggestion later.</p>
                <p>Slany stated that HO is pursuing the matter of access with various agencies but
                    was encountering some problems. HO still has no memorandum of agreement with the
                    Department of Defense. HO historians have had no problem gaining access to the
                    Department of Defense documents, but we need a memorandum of agreement to ensure
                    Committee members’ access to documents. The Committee expressed concern with
                    this and noted that it might want to see some Department of Defense records. NSA
                    did not sign the draft memorandum of understanding that was given to it, stating
                    that they thought it was unnecessary. Kimball will write a letter to Slany
                    stating the Committee’s concern.</p>
                <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0003"/>
                <p>Slany gave the Committee members copies of a letter from CIA Historian Ken
                    McDonald that indicated he had assigned staff members to collect CIA records
                    concerning the 1953 coup in Iran. These documents would be submitted for
                    declassification review to CIA’s Center for the Study of Intelligence. McDonald
                    stated that CIA had no backlog of CIA records in processing for State historians
                    and no pending requests from State historians for access to CIA records.</p>
                <p>Slany said that HO had held up its requests for access at McDonald’s request.
                    Kimball, noting that the Committee had expressed interest in Guatemala as well
                    as Iran, stated that the Committee had merely asked for a plan on how to deal
                    with this issue. The Committee authorized him to make a written request for such
                    a plan. Emily Rosenberg asked if the part of McDonald’s letter about a search
                    through CIA files for documents on Guatemala and Iran could be made public.
                    Slany will take this up with McDonald and noted that CIA was to look at the
                    question of how the material could best be released, whether in a <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volume, publication by CIA, or
                    through releasing the documents to NARA with a finding aid. Rosenberg asked
                    about a target date for this.</p>
                <p>Slany said the question of how CIA would deal with <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> declassification was still being worked out. It was intended
                    that the new unit under David Grease would be responsible for declassification,
                    but as yet there has been no transfer of responsibility. The declassification
                    staff is now preoccupied with the question of Kennedy assassination documents.
                    He asked Joe Chaddic, Chief of HDR, to comment. Chaddic stated that for the
                    first time in his experience, both CIA and NSC have completed all their
                    taskings.</p>
                <p>There was discussion of publication of material concerning the activities of the
                    Committee. Kimball thought an annual report would be enough. The question was
                    raised whether there should be one single report or whether members should
                    report separately to the organizations they represent, with Nelson and Jane
                    Picker noting that the organizations have different interests. Kimball expressed
                    concern that Committee members might seem to be contradicting each other; he
                    thought the Committee should speak with one voice. Picker noted that some
                    sessions are open to the public. Perkins asked that this subject be discussed
                    later. Slany pointed out that the Committee is required to make two annual
                    reports, one unclassified.</p>
                <p>Slany raised the question of making the Committee’s public documents accessible
                    to the public as the law requires. George Chalou of NARA pointed out that the
                    Committee records are part of the Department of State records, but the State
                    Department Library and the FOI reading room both require a building pass. Nelson
                    pointed out that the NARA library is accessible to the <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4"
                        facs="0004"/> public. The Committee asked Slany to investigate this and
                    report at the next meeting.</p>
                <p>The meeting adjourned at 10:30 a.m. for a break.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--july-23--11-a-m--noon_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, July 23, 11 a.m.-noon</hi></head>
                <p>The Committee reconvened at 11 a.m. Slany addressed several questions the
                    Committee had raised at the May meeting:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1. The Committee inquired about declassification of records older than 30
                            years. Slany had no answer for the Committee on this issue but Rosenberg
                            said she would discuss this in the report of her
                        subcommittee.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2. The Committee asked for establishment of the principle that record
                            blocks be declassified when the oldest documents were 30 years old, in
                            order to be in compliance with the law. Slany indicated that he would
                            check with the Department’s Legal Office.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3. The Committee asked for information on the status of the 1958-1960
                            Indonesia compilation of <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>. It
                            was decided that David Mabon, the concerned Division chief, would report
                            to the Committee the next day. [Subsequently, the Committee did not have
                            time to hear this report.]</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Jeanne Pryor, who manages <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    declassification in FPC/HDR, was introduced to the Committee. She handed out a
                    composite report of where each volume was in the declassification process,
                    indicating that she had prepared it as a management tool to help her get a
                    handle on her new job. It was not a duplicate of HO’s chart because it had more
                    as well as different information. She described it as a snapshot of the process
                    at this time. Glenn LaFantasie noted that it served as an interbureau managerial
                    “checks and balances” system.</p>
                <p>In response to a question, Pryor explained that “verification” was a joint HO-HDR
                    review of excisions and deletions in a volume prior to sending declassified
                    manuscript out to the printer.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked about the Cuba volumes for 1961-1963, which seemed to be an anomaly.
                    Pryor responded that Cuba Vol. XI was not a normal volume as tentative
                    selections had been submitted to HDR prior to HO’s completion of the
                    manuscript.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked if HDR reviewed HO’s annotation and was told that it did.</p>
                <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0005"/>
                <p>As to questions from the Committee on Pryor’s memorandum about Japan and
                    Indonesia, LaFantasie responded that these volumes would be discussed
                    tomorrow.</p>
                <p>In introducing the subcommittee report on the planning of the Johnson
                    administration volumes, Slany noted that State Department historian David
                    Patterson had been at the Kennedy Library the previous week. This was HO’s last
                    trip to that Library. An archivist technician had been working at the Johnson
                    Library in Austin in preparation for HO, and we were ready to begin research and
                    compilation on the Johnson era volumes. Patterson would be working there this
                    autumn.</p>
                <p>Nelson reported on behalf of the subcommittee which also included Arnold Taylor.
                    She explained that they could not review a 1964-1968 volume as none had been
                    compiled or annotated. Instead, they discussed with LaFantasie China, 1961-1963,
                    to review the scope of the Johnson volumes.</p>
                <p>The gist of the subcommittee’s report was that the same type of annotation should
                    be retained, including footnotes summarizing other documents, but that the
                    summaries could be shortened. The subcommittee could not agree with the
                    assumption that summaries of documents or attachments to documents could not be
                    included because the documents would eventually be at the National Archives.
                    This precipitated a lengthy discussion of NARA’s treatment of Department of
                    State lot files.</p>
                <p>Kimball said he understood that NARA “broke up” lot files. Mabon pointed out that
                    they were often “consolidated” or combined before they ever got to Archives.
                    David Langbart and Chalou explained that the Department of State screens and
                    consolidates certain lot files under guidelines established in the 1960s:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) Some special collections, records of high officials, and other NARA
                            designated files are not broken up.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) Other lot files, however, are broken up or even destroyed. The citing
                            of a single document in a <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                            volume does not mean that the lot file will be accessioned.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) Lot files were screened (i.e., duplicates destroyed and some documents
                            moved to the Central Files) by State Department records personnel.
                            Langbart indicated that the policy is to make the Central Files as
                            comprehensive as possible since they are indexed.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Chalou said the essential point was that NARA could not control what other
                    agencies did with their records before they were transferred to NARA. Asked by
                    Kennedy if the screening <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6" facs="0006"/> process needs to
                    be reviewed, Langbart said in his opinion it does. The Committee members thought
                    that a subcommittee possibly headed by Ann Van Camp could examine the issue.</p>
                <p>Kimball returned to the question of the nature of annotation in the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes, pointing out that the issue
                    should be resolved, because the compilers needed guidance for the Johnson
                    administration volumes. Nelson reiterated that although the present summaries in
                    footnotes were too long, some summaries were necessary because the document
                    might not be preserved in the Archives. Perkins disagreed, contending that the
                    important thing was to get the volumes published promptly. As far as he was
                    concerned, the volumes could have no notes at all; the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> series was not a substitute for the National
                    Archives. Either a document was worthy of being printed or it wasn’t, but the
                    publication process had to be kept rolling. Betty Glad argued that speed was not
                    as important as thoroughness.</p>
                <p>Glad also asked why 800 pages was the number settled upon ‘ for the Johnson
                    volumes. Kimball said total pages, not the number of pages per volume, was the
                    important figure. Slany interjected that large volumes would impact adversely on
                    public access at Presidential libraries. LaFantasie stated that the target of
                    800 pages was flexible, and an issue for negotiation among himself, the
                    compiler, and the division chief. As for 800-page volumes, economy was a factor,
                    but processing difficulties were crucial. The longer a volume, the more time and
                    money was needed to declassify, print, proofread, index, and publish it.</p>
                <p>Glad suggested that increased selectivity required more time rather than less.
                    Kimball hoped that adjustments would be made rather than compressing key issues
                    into 800-page volumes and expanding less important ones to fill 800 pages.
                    LaFantasie again stressed his flexibility, but noted that when page limitations
                    exceed their targets without negotiation, there were big problems.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned for lunch at noon.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--july-23--1-45-2-15-p-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, July 23, 1:45-2:15 p.m.</hi></head>
                <p>The meeting reconvened at 1:45 p.m.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked for the “professional comments” of the compilers on the proposed
                    changes in annotation for the LBJ volumes.</p>
                <p>Mabon stated that he questioned the assumptions that the volumes are exclusively
                    for people who will work at the National Archives. The series has a larger
                    audience and objective: to provide a representative record of U.S. policy.</p>
                <pb n="7" xml:id="pg_7" facs="0007"/>
                <p>Harriet Schwar noted that reduced coverage and greater selectivity required that
                    footnotes provide continuity. She added that careful use of footnotes avoided
                    some declassification problems and sometimes got the sense of a document
                    published.</p>
                <p>Nina Noring stated that the coverage in <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> had to be coherent and clear and that annotation bridged the
                    gaps in coverage. To keep this under control, she suggested the use of specific
                    limits on the size of footnotes, such as restrictions on the number of lines,
                    because it required the compiler to be more concise and careful.</p>
                <p>Paul Claussen also pointed to the non-scholarly audience and the need for
                    adequate coverage.</p>
                <p>Charles Sampson, describing himself as a “minimalist,” noted that the
                    proliferation of documents in the Johnson period would require very careful
                    annotation procedures.</p>
                <p>Ted Keefer doubted that the Johnson era could be covered in the currently planned
                    33 volumes and stressed the need for more personnel as well as retaining
                    experienced personnel.</p>
                <p>Slany reported that HO currently had two vacancies. One would be filled as of
                    September, and the process for filling the other was going forward right now.
                    LaFantasie doubted that more volumes or more personnel would produce more
                    documentation because of the realities involved in the declassification and
                    publication process -- only so much material can pass through the pipeline at
                    any one time. Kennedy added that the Department was fully behind HO and was
                    working full speed to fill its empty positions.</p>
                <p>Kimball indicated that the Committee was pleased to know that the Department was
                    acting expeditiously to fill vacancies. Kimball then suggested and the Committee
                    agreed to pass on to other business, reserving these matters for a later
                    session.</p>
                <p>Nelson began the report of the subcommittee on declassification guidelines
                    (Nelson/Rosenberg), reporting on her observations of the NARA declassification
                    operation. She noted that the staff turnover was constant and that NARA does not
                    sanitize documents but only withholds them in accordance with guidelines
                    provided by the State Department. Her conclusions were that many documents were
                    being withheld or slowed in release by intelligence sources or foreign
                    government information issues rather than because of their content. She did not
                    feel that guidelines were wrongly applied but rather too widely applied.</p>
                <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0008"/>
                <p>Rosenberg began her remarks by stating the goals of the subcommittee: 1) to
                    investigate whether current document declassification guidelines would permit
                    the Department of State to meet the publication deadlines established by law for
                    the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series, and 2) to ascertain
                    whether the declassification process has evolved to meet public and scholarly
                    needs after the Cold War’s end.</p>
                <p>On both counts, she said, the subcommittee was pessimistic.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg distinguished between two types of declassification: that related to
                    the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series and the aggregate
                    declassification of all State Department records.</p>
                <p>Concerning <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, the subcommittee was
                    pleased with the declassification goals being set and some of the efforts made
                    to attain those goals. Rosenberg noted with approval the appointment of Pryor at
                    HDR as deputy in charge, of coordinating the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> declassification effort. She also noted that the review
                    process in other agencies shows signs of becoming more efficient. She noted with
                    approval that HDR was now preparing status charts like those of HO. But, she
                    concluded, many bottlenecks still exist which hinder the declassification
                    process and may prevent HO from meeting the publication timeline.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg said there have been dramatic improvements and structural changes in
                    the aggregate declassification process. She noted the designation of William
                    Hamilton to coordinate aggregate declassification for HDR and the rapid creation
                    of new aggregate declassification guidelines. She praised the flexibility of
                    these new guidelines (established for 1960-1963) and HDR’s new policy decision
                    that not only will these supersede the old ones but will be retroactive and
                    apply to the earlier record groups. She noted, however, that there will be some
                    delay in the implementation of the new guidelines and the new policy of
                    retroactivity.</p>
                <p>There was a discussion of whether the new, less restrictive giudelines would have
                    an impact on FOIA requests. <hi rend="underline">Chaddic assured the Committee
                        that although FOIA requests for State documents at NARA might be referred to
                        State under the old guidelines, they would be reviewed at the State
                        Department using current guidelines</hi>. <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn1"
                        >Underscored text is HDR revision.</note> The delay would not be a long one.
                    Finally, Rosenberg reported that steps were being taken to make the computerized
                    information retrieval and database systems of the State Department (INFORM) and
                    NARA compatible. There is already a link between INFORM and the database at the
                    Carter Presidential Library, she said.</p>
                <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0009"/>
                <p>Rosenberg turned next to a. discussion of the various declassification
                    bottlenecks which may hamper work on the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series and the work of diplomatic historians generally.</p>
                <p>Despite the efforts to improve the compatibility of documentary databases she had
                    just outlined, Rosenberg concluded that the incompatibility and fragmentation of
                    scholarly information management systems remains a serious obstacle to
                    historical research. She stressed the need for more interlocking databases to
                    improve user efficiency and suggested that the Committee work officially to
                    improve information management coordination. Of particular use in a database,
                    she said, would be information concerning documents withheld from release. She
                    said there were actually surprisingly few such documents.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg was hopeful that the NARA declassification database might make an
                    unusually helpful aid to scholars attempting to do research in Department of
                    State files. Langbart pointed out that the CIA regards the NARA database as
                    classified. Rosenberg expressed a wish to find a way to make the system
                    available to the public.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg noted the large number of people involved in the declassification
                    process and the overlapping tasks they perform. It is a personnel-intensive
                    process, she said. This had always been the case and may not be a bad thing. She
                    suggested that it may be time for a review of this system. Perhaps there is a
                    different optimal mix of reviewers (archival technicians and HDR personnel) for
                    different types of documents which would improve the efficiency of the review
                    process. Nelson concurred with Rosenberg that the Committee should recommend
                    that an optimal mix be explored with an eye toward improving the efficiency of
                    the review process.</p>
                <p>Finally, Rosenberg said that the category of “foreign government information”
                    which is often not declassified, is defined too broadly and too vaguely by the
                    declassifiers. There is an over-emphasis on what constitutes foreign government
                    information, she said. The Committee should recommend narrowing the definition
                    of this information or at least re-examining it.</p>
                <p>There followed a discussion between members of the Committee and the HDR staff
                    over the current definition of foreign government information. <hi
                        rend="underline">Chaddic defined it as a foreign government document or
                        information in a U.S. document that is provided by a foreign government.
                        Nelson and Chaddic reviewed the considerations that required Soviet
                        press</hi>
                    <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0010"/>
                    <hi rend="underline">clippings to be regarded as foreign government information,
                        though not classified</hi>.*</p>
                <p>In response to a question from Kimball/- Chaddic explained that the contents of a
                    memorandum of conversation between an American official and an official of a
                    foreign government <hi rend="underline">would be considered foreign government
                        information and might remain classified depending on its contents</hi>. It
                    would be a judgment call. Many such decisions concerning foreign government
                    information are judgment calls <hi rend="underline">requiring HDR
                        participation</hi>. <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn2">Underscored text is HDR
                        revision.</note></p>
                <p>Chaddic said that a call for a re-examination of what constitutes foreign
                    government information would not be helpful to HDR because such a re-examination
                    was already underway. He asked for specific recommendations from the Committee.
                    Otherwise, he said, he might have to call in outside management consultants for
                    advice.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg was concerned that the Department could not meet its obligation under
                    the new law to open records at 30 years. The Department would have to “play
                    catch-up” in accelerating the process. The Department had acknowledged the need
                    by deciding to perform declassification review in State on some specialized
                    issues like a UN lot file or Berlin, rather than giving it to NARA. But major
                    problems remained such as the fragmented management of information and
                    overlappping tasks of declassification reviewers at NARA and the State
                    Department. The program needed re-examination.</p>
                <p>Chaddic commended the subcommittee’s assistance but asked again for <hi
                        rend="underline">more specific</hi> help from the Committee. He has been
                    re-examining and revising the declassification process for months. He doesn’t
                        <hi rend="underline">need</hi>
                    <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn3">Underscored text is HDR revision.</note> a
                    recommendation now simply to re-examine the problem.</p>
                <p>Another discussion ensued about the efficiency of the current mix of personnel
                    involved in the aggregate declassification process. Hamilton of HDR concurred
                    with a point made earlier by Nelson that many archival personnel involved in the
                    initial stages of the process are young, inexperienced technicians who are
                    lulled into <hi rend="underline">occasional lapses</hi> by the drudgery of the
                    task. He maintained that because of mistakes made by the NARA reviewers, it was
                    necessary for State Department reviewers from HDR to <hi rend="underline"
                        >scan</hi> their work, sometimes <hi rend="underline">check over it</hi>
                    very thoroughly. He said that the HDR review by experienced hands was <hi
                        rend="underline">necessary</hi> to the aggregate declassification process
                        <hi rend="underline">to validate or lift proposed denials and to check for
                        errors by the NARA reviewers</hi>.*</p>
                <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0011"/>
                <p>Hamilton and Committee members reviewed further the number of reviews and the
                    reasons for them. First review was by low-ranking archives technicians at NARA.
                    A NARA team leader made a second review when he reviewed the technicians’
                    decisions. A third review occurred when State/HDR re-reviewed NARA’s reviews.
                    ‘Then HDR, lacking full confidence in NARA’s junior technicians, often reviewed
                    all of a box of records to check behind NARA. <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn4">HDR’s
                        comment on this paragraph reads: “The third sentence as written is what was
                        said, but is factually incorrect; team leaders do not perform the second
                        review. (SIC) Technicians’ decisions are checked by a second NARA reviewer.
                        A third review occurred when State/HDR validated NARA’s reviews. Sometimes,
                        all classified documents in a box of records are checked, though not on a
                        line-by-line basis as during NARA’s reviews.”</note></p>
                <p>Kimball took issue rather strongly with the idea that this many-layered review
                    was the most efficient way of declassifying documents. He adjourned the meeting
                    for a break.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--july-23--3-30-5-p-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, July 23, 3:30-5 p.m.</hi></head>
                <p>Following the break, the Committee continued to consider the report of the
                    subcommittee on declassification guidelines. Kimball proposed that someone of
                    authority at the National Archives, namely the Archivist Don Wilson, be invited
                    to meet with the Committee to discuss several of the items raised in the
                    discussion of the subcommittee report. After some discussion, it was decided
                    that Kimball should telephone Wilson to extend an invitation to meet with the
                    Committee the following day and that if Wilson could not attend then no one
                    lower than Trudy Peterson’s level be sent. Kimball then left the room to make
                    the telephone call, leaving Rosenberg to chair the discussion in his
                    absence.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked why NARA needed guidelines once the declassification review had
                    been completed for a given record block. Chaddic explained that once the
                    Department’s records were transferred to NARA, NARA had responsibility for
                    responding to FOIA and mandatory review requests. For the same reason,
                    guidelines were also passed on to the Presidential libraries. The guidelines
                    contained two lists for each subject. One described issues that were no longer
                    sensitive and that could be released without consulting the Department. The
                    other described matters that remained sensitive and were to be referred to the
                    Department of State for decision. A problem could arise because NARA might not
                    have the most recent guidelines for a given subject that were more liberal than
                    previous guidelines. In this case, once the document was <pb n="12"
                        xml:id="pg_12" facs="0012"/> referred to the Department of State the more
                    liberal guidelines were applied leading to the release of the information.</p>
                <p>The Committee then focused on the guidelines for Yugoslavia. Nelson raised the
                    point that those concerned with protecting security information had far less to
                    worry about with the release of large blocks of documents that were 30 years old
                    than they did with information released under FOIA and mandatory review. If one
                    or two mistakes were made in the review of 30-year old documents (and sensitive
                    information inadvertently released) it would take a considerable amount of time
                    for a private researcher to locate the offending items and even then it was
                    highly unlikely that the discovery would be publicized in the popular press as
                    very few journalists did this kind of research. In contrast, a number of
                    journalists used FOIA and publicized their findings.</p>
                <p>Glad referred to a statement made prior to the break by Hamilton that
                    demonstrated a concern that inadvertent release of sensitive information might,
                        <hi rend="underline">as in past instances, damage</hi>
                    <hi rend="underline">relations with foreign governments</hi>. <note n="*"
                        xml:id="p1fn5">Underscored text is HDR revision.</note> She felt that this
                    sentiment was not in accord with the mandate under the new legislation. She
                    pointed out that just because a foreign government might protest an item did not
                    mean that release damaged the national security of the united States. She did
                    not think that the potential objection of a foreign government should be a major
                    concern. Glad said that a question of values was involved. Why did the
                    Department appear to be more sensitive to foreign government criticism than it
                    was to potential criticism from the U.S. Congress. Also, a different standard
                    was being used here than was applied to some other government activities. Many
                    potential regulations by OSHA and EPA were not issued because they would cost
                    too much. Here any cost seemed bearable to withhold certain information from the
                    American people. A cost-effective argument should also be applied in this area.
                    She called this a “fundamental value conflict.”</p>
                <p>Rosenberg then raised two points. First, the subcommittee had been impressed with
                    Department of State efforts in this area, but this attitude needs to spread. She
                    noted that the public expected change in the wake of the Cold War. Secondly,
                    there was a widespread view that the legislation would be difficult to meet. The
                    Committee was supposed to be an early-warning system for such problems, to call
                    attention to this fact and find ways to bridge the gap. The Committee should
                    urge even more effective coordination among HO, HDR, and NARA. It can project
                    what kind of resources are needed and it can recommend efficiencies to eliminate
                    duplication of effort. Rosenberg said that she and Nelson felt that much
                    progress had <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0013"/> been made but there were
                    roadblocks that had to be overcome to get the job done. She thought the solution
                    to bridge the gap and meet the legislation would be a combination of increased
                    resources, that is money, and of introducing efficiencies into the process.</p>
                <p>Nelson emphasized the need for rethinking declassification as an artifact of the
                    Cold War. If the United States set out deliberately to construct the most
                    expensive system possible to retain secrets, it could not have created a more
                    costly system than the one it had now. The danger of the Cold War was past and
                    it was time to move on.</p>
                <p>Taylor asked whether there were any U.S. bilateral agreements with foreign
                    governments pertaining to the need to protect foreign government information.
                    Chaddic said he knew of none, but that protecting foreign government information
                    on <hi rend="underline">a reciprocal basis</hi> came down to our own self
                    interest. The decision to withhold such information was made on a case-by-case
                    basis <hi rend="underline">in consultation with</hi>
                    <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn6">Underscored text is HDR revision.</note> the relevant
                    geographic bureau and desk.</p>
                <p>Kimball returned to the room and said that Trudy Peterson had agreed to come at
                    10:30 a.m. the following day. The Committee would want to speak with her about
                    coordination between the State Department and NARA and about foreign government
                    information. Perkins objected that NARA had no control over the withholding of
                    foreign government information. Kimball explained that they would ask how the
                    Archives uses the definition of foreign government information supplied by the
                    Deparmtent of State.</p>
                <p>Kimball then proposed that instead of continuing the discussion on
                    declassification guidelines that the Committee focus instead on the Cuba agenda
                    item that was scheduled for 10:45 on Friday. He said that they could not discuss
                    Japan at this moment because the Japan desk officer was not present.</p>
                <p>Kimball wished it written into the minutes his explanation of why “Comments from
                    Staff” appeared in the agenda for this meeting and would reappear in subsequent
                    agenda. He said that this was a reminder to the HO staff that the Committee
                    would discuss with them any declassification and compilation issues that the
                    staff might wish to raise. None had been raised for this meeting so the
                    Committee could pass over this agenda item.</p>
                <p>Kimball then asked Slany to give his presentation on the preparation of two
                    volumes on Cuba for the 1961-1963 triennium. Slany said that the Cuba experience
                    was a model and a unique opportunity to show what could be done. The volumes <pb
                        n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0014"/> had special and unique problems of
                    declassification and compilation. Because of the public attention being given
                    the release of the U.S.-Soviet correspondence over the missile crisis, the
                    Office determined to try to accelerate the compilation process of the Cuba
                    volumes, in part to test the system: whether State historians could have access
                    to CIA documents and whether HO and HDR could cooperate. He also noted that this
                    was a test of the framework of the legislation. He then turned the presentation
                    over to LaFantasie.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie said that public anticipation arising out of the release of the
                    Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence on the Cuban missile crisis had created a
                    foundation for what the Office wanted to do with the two Cuba volumes. This
                    experiment had been largely successful, but some difficulties had also been
                    encountered. One success was access to CIA documents; the compiler had been able
                    to consult documents relating to Cuba and order photocopies. These photocopies
                    had been received, although only after a long delay. Human factors, however,
                    intervened. The main compiler, Louis Smith, had a serious illness that took him
                    out of the office for a substantial amount of time. Charles Sampson and Edward
                    Keefer were reassigned from other volumes to work on Cuba. Documentation from
                    CIA did not arrive until the eleventh hour and was integrated into the second
                    Cuba volume that covered the missile crisis.</p>
                <p>HO also received a high degree of cooperation from HDR which agreed to accept and
                    review documents that had not yet been edited and annotated, a departure from
                    normal procedure. (<hi rend="underline">It was a matter of concern to the
                        reviewer that, having agreed to a departure from HDR’s regular practice, he
                        was not receiving documents to review</hi>. <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn7"
                        >Underscored text is HDR revision.</note>) Keefer and Sampson then completed
                    and submitted an annotated manuscript to HDR. The annotated manuscript is now
                    going through clearance, although only the annotation is being reviewed.
                    LaFantasie admitted that although the process had been expedited, the project
                    was still off schedule, behind by 2-1/2 to 3 months. The goal had been to
                    publish these volumes by the spring of 1993, and this was still possible if
                    “spring” were defined loosely. He admitted that this had become a complicated
                    and complex project.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie said that Cuba I (1961-63, vol. X) was now with other agencies for
                    clearance. Meanwhile, additional documents were being incorporated into the
                    manuscript by the compilers. It would appear that Cuba II (1961-63, vol. XI) was
                    now ahead of Cuba I in the declassification process and would come out <pb
                        n="15" xml:id="pg_15" facs="0015"/> first rather than the two coming out at
                    the same time as originally planned. LaFantasie said he could not declare the
                    experiment a successful one until the bound books had arrived. But he said that
                    this experiment showed that it was possible to accelerate and expedite a volume
                    and it forged a better relationship between HO and HDR. The real test would
                    come, however, in the declassification process when it is revealed how much --
                    or how little -- the CIA and State are willing to make public.</p>
                <p>Slany interjected that LaFantasie was “too cautious.” Great flexibility has been
                    shown by all including CIA. The Office received very revealing documents from
                    CIA that have been included in the volume. The experience also showed how people
                    in our Office can take up the slack caused by unexpected illnesses and
                    interruptions of the schedule.</p>
                <p>In response to a question on how the declassification was going, Pryor responded
                    that on April 30 when the compilation and accompanying diskette were submitted,
                    a computer check against the Department’s INFORM System yielded a large number
                    of “hits.” Many of the documents had been the subject of long litigation that
                    resulted in a recent court decision. The HDR reviewer was doing a side-by-side
                    comparison of the results of the court decision and documents in the volume that
                    would facilitate the speedy processing of this volume.</p>
                <p>George Herring pointed out that when these volumes appeared, people would not be
                    focusing on the Bay of Pigs or on the Missile Crisis, but on Mongoose. Coverage
                    of Mongoose would be the test of how the volumes would be received.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie volunteered that HO had obtained a good deal of material on Mongoose.
                    Pryor confirmed that a number of Mongoose documents had been in the compilation
                    submitted and and were part of the recent court case. Kimball asked whether the
                    litigation would provide leverage for future appeals. Pryor said that it would.
                    During subsequent discussion, it was clarified that the suit had been brought by
                    the National Security Archive and that the decision handed down was narrow in
                    that it applied only to the documents at issue and did not apply to CIA
                    documents on other subjects.</p>
                <p>Kimball then directed the discussion to five items that the most recent <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> Production Status and Projections
                    Chart indicated were behind schedule. Subsequent discussion clarified these
                    items as follows:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) The Intelligence Supplement: HDR explained that the delay was due to
                            the fact that HO submitted the manuscript late and that it was quite
                            large. Chaddic commended the reviewer handling the project for doing
                            “yeoman service.”</p></item>
                    <pb n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0016"/>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1958-1960, III, National
                            Security Affairs: HDR explained that it is with other agencies for
                            review. Chaddic drew attention to the status report presented on page 3
                            of Pryor’s report handed out to the Committee earlier in the
                            session.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1958-1960, XII, Near
                            East: Attention was again drawn to Pryor‘s report which indicated that
                            CIA had signed off on the documents in question on July 5 and that
                            verification was awaiting Herschler’s return from vacation.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>4-5) <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1958-1960, Western
                            Europe and Berlin Crisis. It was confirmed that these had now been
                            cleared.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Perkins pointed out that even though these last two volumes were now nearing
                    completion the length of time that they were in clearance was a matter worth
                    exploring. He noted that the Committee had no current volume it was reviewing
                    and suggested that they might look at one of these at the next meeting.
                    Rosenberg noted that Slany ought to be given the opportunity to suggest a new
                    volume to examine.</p>
                <p>The discussion then turned to the proposed preface to the 1958-1960 Japan volume.
                    Kimball indicated that all members of the Committee had liked what Slany had
                    sent to them except for the final paragraph which dealt with the Committee’s
                    role. He then read the text of an alternate paragraph that Perkins had drafted
                    and opened the matter for discussion.</p>
                <p>Glad noted that the Committee did make the recommendation that the Japan volume
                    not be published and that this should be recorded in the preface. Perkins
                    indicated his desire that a paragraph be used in all <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> volumes to indicate which volumes the Committee did
                    or did not review. He did not wish the Committee to be identified with volumes
                    it had not seen, in case some criticism was made of them in later years. Kimball
                    reminded the Committee that in the case of the Japan volume the Committee felt
                    there was a distortion but enough remained of the volume that it deserved
                    publication.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg indicated her opposition to drafting different prefaces for each volume
                    the Committee reviewed. Nelson asked Rosenberg whether she would accept language
                    that merely stated whether or not a volume had been reviewed, to which Rosenberg
                    replied no. She preferred a boilerplate that could be used for all volumes and
                    did not wish it to indicate which volumes the Committee reviewed or did not
                    review, because the Committee could not be responsible for possible documents
                    that might be added at a later time.</p>
                <pb n="17" xml:id="pg_17" facs="0017"/>
                <p>Kimball explained that he and Perkins were talking about a paragraph dealing with
                    the role of the Advisory Committee. Slany suggested using language from the
                    legislation stating that the Historian was supposed to inform the Committee
                    about declassification problems if they resulted in a manuscript that distorted
                    the historical record. Picker said that the language used needed to reflect
                    that.</p>
                <p>Subsequent discussion then focused on what the legislation actually said as to
                    who was to take the initiative in proposing that the Committee review specific
                    volumes and to what extent the Committee was responsible for the integrity of
                    the entire series. After consulting the legislation, it was determined that the
                    Historian had the initiative to select specific volumes for review under Section
                    403, but Kimball noted that the statute intended the Committee to have
                    responsibility for the entire series by requiring it to oversee procedures. Glad
                    pointed out that there was a concern that the Committee not be seen to have
                    reviewed all volumes.</p>
                <p>Perkins indicated his support for Picker’s proposal, indicating that it would get
                    the Committee “off the hook” and might be better than what he proposed.
                    Rosenberg also voiced support for the proposal to use the language from the
                    statute, because it would then be clear when the Committee was not being
                    alerted. She said she was troubled with Kimball’s broad interpretation of the
                    legislation as to the Committee’s responsibility. Picker noted that it would be
                    historically interesting for users to see which volumes the Committee had
                    reviewed. Rosenberg agreed with specific language, but she worried that 10 years
                    from now, people would ask why the Committee had not reviewed a specific
                    volume.</p>
                <p>Kimball closed the meeting by indicating that he and Slany would work on the
                    language for a new paragraph that would indicate the Committee’s responsibility
                    for the process and its relationship to any incompleteness in the series. He
                    said the matter would be open for discussion the following day.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned for the day.</p>
                <pb n="18" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0018"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--july-24--9-30-10-30-a-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, July 24, 9:30-10:30 a.m.</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball called the meeting to order at 9:30 a.m. Slany introduced Deputy Director
                    of the Office of Japanese Affairs John F. Scott. Scott described the action
                    memorandum from Tutwiler to Rogers regarding Department justification for denial
                    of documents in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volume on Japan
                    for 1958-1960. The Department is asking Rogers to make decisions on:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) retaining classification on the bulk of documents at issue,</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) concurrence in the statement to be printed in the preface,
                        and</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) approval of the plan to identify the denied documents in the
                            volume.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>The memorandum is in EAP Front Office for approval. David Mabon reported that the
                    Department of Defense had withdrawn its objections to publication of its
                    previously declassified documents. The Committee expressed its satisfaction with
                    this and expressed the hope that this would establish a precedent.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked if the Committee had seen the statement and was assured by Kimball
                    that the Committee had and still needed to draft the final paragraph for the
                    preface statement.</p>
                <p>It was noted that the Committee had recommended release of the withheld
                    documents. Rogers has the Committee’s recommendation and <hi rend="underline"
                        >the memo from Tutwiler will include</hi>
                    <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn8">Underscored text is EAP revision.</note> a detailed
                    explanation of <hi rend="underline">the</hi> reasons for withholding. Scott
                    noted that the justifications for denying the documents fell into three main
                    categories and that the <hi rend="underline">EAP-drafted justification</hi>
                    grouped the documents by these topics. The Committee requested that the EAP <hi
                        rend="underline">language</hi> be made available at the next meeting, to
                    which Scott agreed.</p>
                <p>Glad said that the Committee was not dealing with trivial issues and that the
                    Committee should work out procedures for future volumes. Kimball stated that
                    Department officials had indicated that they considered the Committee had acted
                    responsibly in its general handling of the case. Scott seconded this and said
                    that he and the EAP Bureau appreciated the quality of discussions with the
                    Committee. He then left the meeting.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if in the 10 minutes before the next speaker the Committee would
                    like to work over the last paragraph. He then read the draft paragraph, which
                    stated that the Committee had been apprised of the Department’s decision to
                    withhold a <pb n="19" xml:id="pg_19" facs="0019"/> number of documents which it
                    considered to be integral and essential, and had approved publication of the
                    disclaimer in the preceding paragraphs.</p>
                <p>Perkins wanted to add a sentence to the preface of every volume as to whether the
                    Committee had played a role with respect to the volume. Rosenberg thought the
                    paragraph as read by Kimball raised more questions than it answered. She
                    proposed a boilerplate paragraph for all volumes, drawing upon the language of
                    the legislation to indicate the committee’s role in general terms. She pointed
                    out that determining language for every volume with which the Committee was
                    involved could be time consuming. Picker stated that it should be possible to
                    have several boilerplate paragraphs with to cover all contingencies.</p>
                <p>Kimball proposed that Picker, with her fresh perspective on historical
                    documentation, draft three paragraphs covering all positions. Nelson said that
                    “approved” should be changed to “agreed to” and the entire Committee
                    approved.</p>
                <p>At the Committee’s request, Assistant Legal Adviser for Treaty Affairs Robert E.
                    Dalton described the Department’s program of publication of treaties and
                    agreements and the <hi rend="underline">Digest of U.S. Practice in International
                        Law</hi>. He reviewed for the Committee the two statutes mandating
                    publication of treaties: 1 USC 112B and 1 USC 113. Two series met this
                    requirement: TIAS (113), which are single published pamphlets of selected
                    treaties, and U.S. Treaties (112B), which are bound volumes by year and include
                    all treaties.</p>
                <p>Treaties can be put into two categories : those that require advice and consent
                    from the Senate, of which there are approximately 13 per year, and international
                    agreements, about 413 per year. With the reduced Department budget, L has sought
                    ways to meet the mandate to publish by using computer technology. Treaty
                    publication is far behind, but the new technology is being used to try to
                    eliminate the backlog. He noted that “unperfected” treaties, which never entered
                    into force, are available in a privately published series, <hi rend="underline"
                        >Unperfected Treaties of the United States</hi>.</p>
                <p>Picker asked whether classified treaties or classified annexes to treaties are
                    subject to regular declassification procedures. Dalton replied that no
                    classified treaties have gone to the Senate since 1791, but that some treaties
                    do have classified annexes, which are never published. Picker asked how one
                    would find out about these and Dalton said that an annex or agreement to a
                    treaty may be classified, but the number of these is small. Chaddic stated that
                    such classified material does get into the Central Files, goes to NARA, and is
                    subject to normal declassification procedures.</p>
                <pb n="20" xml:id="pg_20" facs="0020"/>
                <p>Picker asked about the <hi rend="underline">Digest of U.S. Practice in
                        International Law</hi> in terms of selection of documents for <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. Dalton replied that they
                    were totally separate projects, but noted that the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Digest</hi> included quite a bit of material relating to treaties. He
                    thought if the <hi rend="underline">Digest</hi> were discontinued, the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series might want to include more
                    such material. Picker then asked about continued publication of the <hi
                        rend="underline">Digest</hi> and Dalton replied that the Department’s Office
                    of the Inspector General had recommended that the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Digest</hi> be discontinued. L believes that there are good reasons to
                    continue its publication even with resource limitations; no final decision by L
                    has been taken. Dalton mentioned that a group from the Council of Europe is
                    working on a <hi rend="underline">Digest</hi>-like publication.</p>
                <p>Picker asked if L documents of interest are finding their way to the Central
                    Files. Dalton told her that a broader question--What is the effect of
                    computerization on the kinds of materials that historians want?--was of more
                    concern. He gave an example about E-mail and fax machines and the loss of the’
                    written record.</p>
                <p>Picker asked about agreements made by other agencies or made by the President
                    without referral to the Department of State. Dalton replied that the
                    Case-Zablocki Act required yearly reports to Congress from agencies on the
                    status of international agreements and that the problem was reasonably under
                    control. Glad asked about the situation prior to the Case Act. Langbart noted
                    that such agreements do show up in the records of various agencies.</p>
                <p>Picker asked if the L session was unclassified even though the Committee met in
                    executive session. She wanted the minutes to reflect that the session was
                    unclassified so she could present it to the American Society for International
                    Law.</p>
                <p>The session ended at 10:30 a.m.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--july-24--10-45-a-m--noon_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, July 24, 10:45 a.m.-noon</hi></head>
                <p>The meeting reconvened at 10:45 a.m. Kimball announced that the briefing by the
                    Government Printing Officials would be postponed until the November meeting.
                    During a brief discussion about scheduling the next meeting, Kimball noted that
                    a meeting in November would meet the statutory requirement of four Advisory
                    Committee meetings in the calendar year.</p>
                <p>Kimball then introduced Trudy Peterson, Assistant Archivist of the U.S., and
                    Jeanne Schauble, Director of the Records Declassification Division at the
                    National Archives, where <pb n="21" xml:id="pg_21" facs="0021"/> archives
                    technicians perform the first declassification review of State Department
                    records. Peterson and Schauble had come to discuss with the Committee its
                    concerns about the declassification process and the legislative deadline of 30
                    years.</p>
                <p>Peterson began by assuring the Committee that the National Archives was also
                    interested in streamlining the declassification process and avoiding duplication
                    of effort. Concerning establishment of priorities for declassification, the
                    Archives was convening a meeting in October at which users can make their wishes
                    known regarding priorities for the Archives’ declassification effort.</p>
                <p>Regarding the larger issue of multi-user databases and lists of declassified and
                    denied documents, the National Archives has been exploring ways to share
                    information among agencies, but there is no consensus among all the agencies
                    that have a stake in the issue. NARA has been working with the Information
                    Security Oversight Office (ISOO) to develop a Statement of Work prior to
                    advertising a contract to examine this issue. The Statement of Work would
                    include two parts:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) The contractor would go to the agencies concerned to try to get a
                            consensus on sharing data and on the kinds of data to be shared. The
                            alternatives for information to be included in a shared database
                            include: a minimum amount of information regarding any one document
                            (from/to information), subject tags that could be searched or sorted on,
                            and an optical system that would include documents on-line. The agencies
                            would consider and agree on the amount of information that would be
                            shared.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) The contractor would then consider the technical possibilities, cost
                            efficiency, and effectiveness of implementing such a shared
                            database.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Peterson stressed again the importance to NARA, given its limited resources, not
                    to duplicate effort.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked if such a shared listing will happen. Peterson replied that the
                    study will certainly happen; her best hope is that some agencies will agree to
                    participate and a model will be created. She felt that even a partial system is
                    better than none.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg asked if the database would be available to researchers in some
                    sanitized form. Peterson indicated that, in order to get maximum participation
                    from agencies, making the database public had not been considered. When
                    Rosenberg asked <pb n="22" xml:id="pg_22" facs="0022"/> if the Committee could
                    help in making the database available, Peterson indicated that letters to
                    Congress might help but State and NARA were not the right places to apply
                    pressure.</p>
                <p>Nelson wondered if there had been any changes in the declassification and
                    transfer of CIA records to NARA. Peterson noted that NARA has yet to see a
                    change since Director Gates’ statement that the CIA would declassify its
                    records. Unlike the State Department, the CIA strips all classified material
                    from its records before transferring them.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked about the relationship between the Department declassification
                    staff (HDR) and NARA and the duplication of effort. Kimball emphasized that the
                    Committee wanted to recommend ways to make the process more efficient and
                    eliminate bottlenecks. He noted that at the minimum the material received four
                    reviews: the first at State, two at NARA, and then a final one at State. <note
                        n="*" xml:id="p1fn9">HDR’s comment on the last sentence of this paragraph
                        reads: “This sentence may represent what was said, but is factually
                        incorrect. (SIC) He noted that the material received three reviews: two by
                        NARA and the final one by State.:</note></p>
                <p>Peterson noted that NARA had no vested interest in this review, and was assisting
                    the declassification by doing the first “rough cut” on State documents. Taylor
                    wondered if a more qualified reviewer at NARA could process the material,
                    eliminating a second NARA review. Peterson pointed out that the archives
                    technicians positions have been classified at a GS-7 grade level and cannot be
                    upgraded because they only apply guidelines. She <hi rend="underline">said that
                        an interim review by NARA had looked at whether the second review could be
                        eliminated and had concluded that it could not because</hi>
                    <note n="**" xml:id="p1fn10">Underscored text is NARA revision.</note> the
                    second review by NARA archivist catches errors. If State wants to assume that
                    review function, as Perkins suggested, then it could.</p>
                <p>Committee members asked several questions about the second review of State
                    documents: what kind of errors does the second review catch, what is the volume
                    of errors. Schauble noted that the second review, which is also a training tool
                    for teaching new employees, picks up errors on both sides &amp;#x2014; both
                    release and deny. Peterson pointed out that it depends on the reviewers and the
                    complexity of the documents. She repeated that NARA could stop the second review
                    at the risk of deteriorating relations between NARA and the State
                    Department.</p>
                <p>In response to questions from Rosenberg and Picker, Schauble noted that the
                    junior archives technicians are trained to be consistent in applying the
                    declassification guidelines to <pb n="23" xml:id="pg_23" facs="0023"/> the
                    documents. Documents are not reviewed differently depending on their
                    classification. At this time, the staff is fully trained, but the turnover in
                    personnel is high, and she is not willing to risk releasing material that should
                    be withheld, especially given the importance of State records.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked Peterson about rotating people among several jobs to mitigate the
                    problem of boredom and inattention. Peterson replied that it is possible, but
                    the two problems of training and obtaining clearances for a larger pool of
                    people are formidable.</p>
                <p>Glad wondered if the balance always tipped toward continued classification.
                    Peterson stressed that NARA must minimize security violations so that it will
                    keep the confidence of the government’s agencies and continue to receive all
                    agencies’ records. Security violations were formally reported both to the agency
                    and to ISOO and any security violation could make an agency reluctant to
                    cooperate. The system had to be kept as honest as possible, and NABA <hi
                        rend="underline">is cautious in applying</hi>
                    <hi rend="underline">declassification guidelines in</hi>
                    <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn11">Underscored text is NARA revision.</note> order to
                    retain the trust of agencies.</p>
                <p>Glad asked whether NARA did sampling as a basis for bulk declassification.
                    Peterson indicated that NARA does do sampling and bulk declassification,
                    particularly if a body of records was old and non-sensitive.</p>
                <p>Perkins wondered if it were true that NARA does not know if documents have been
                    printed in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series. Peterson
                    agreed but reminded him that it’s not always clear if all copies of documents
                    are identical.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked for recommendations for ways to attack the declassification review
                    problem at NARA. In response, Peterson listed three changes she believes would
                    speed the process:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) The U.S. Government must have a date by which everything would be
                            declassified &amp;#x2014; a “drop-dead date.”</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) The U.S. Government must have a better definition of foreign
                            government information and a streamlined process for reviewing foreign
                            government information more than 50 years old. These documents should
                            all be referred to the Department of State instead of to the “agencies
                            of interest.”</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) The National Archives needs real declassification guidance from other
                            agencies. State is the only agency that <hi rend="underline">furnishes
                                the most comprehensive guidelines for release and other agencies
                                should emulate this model</hi>.*</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="24" xml:id="pg_24" facs="0024"/>
                <p>Taylor asked about the issue of successor states when considering foreign
                    government information. Chaddic indicated that HDR develops guidelines.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked Peterson if there were a way to improve the State guidelines.
                    Peterson indicated that NARA needs comprehensive guidelines that cover all
                    conceivable subjects. New guidelines should indicate that they supersede all
                    previous ones and that they should apply to previous record blocks.</p>
                <p>Kimball turned to Chaddic and asked if he could make a public statement that any
                    new guidelines would supersede old ones. Chaddic agreed.</p>
                <p>Taylor asked if State declassifiers could be detailed to NARA for one-step
                    declassification. Chaddic noted that cost would be a significant impediment to
                    this, and Schauble added that NARA must review and apply guidelines to documents
                    from other agencies that might appear in State files. Peterson was willing to
                    consider such details.</p>
                <p>William Hamilton of HDR noted that he believed that the two-tier system of review
                    worked best because it took advantage of the archival experience in NARA.
                    Kimball again voiced his concern at meeting the legislative deadlines given the
                    many and time-consuming reviews of State documents transferred to NARA.</p>
                <p>Nelson was also concerned at the time lag between the physical transfer of
                    records (and their inaccessibility to researchers) and the receipt of new
                    guidelines from State. Langbart explained the process: the records are
                    physically transferred to NARA with draft guidelines, archives technicians
                    review the documents and tab documents for denial, State reviews and finalizes
                    the guidelines; the records are legally accessioned by NARA. Until the
                    guidelines are finalized by State, they cannot be applied by NARA to other
                    accessioned records. Chaddic indicated that the time has been significantly
                    shortened, which Nelson acknowledged, but he insisted that the guidelines have
                    to be reviewed <hi rend="underline">on the basis of experience before they are
                        applied by NARA and Presidential Library personnel to older records</hi>.
                        <note n="*" xml:id="p1fn12">Underscored text is HDR revision.</note></p>
                <p>Nelson commented that the Committee has made several suggestions to accelerate
                    the declassification process in order to meet the statute but all have dismissed
                    as impossible. It appeared to her that it would be impossible to meet the
                    statutory requirement of review and declassification of records at 30 years.
                    Kimball agreed, noting that it seemed as though the Department of State would
                    not be able to meet certain provisions of the law.</p>
                <p>At this point, the Committee adjourned for lunch where they would be joined by
                    Under Secretary Rogers.</p>
                <pb n="25" xml:id="pg_25" facs="0025"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="luncheon-discussion-with-under-secretary-rogers--july-24_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Luncheon Discussion With Under Secretary Rogers, July
                        24</hi></head>
                <p>Under Secretary John F.W. Rogers told the Committee that he had commissioned a
                    report on reforming the Department’s declassification process, and that he would
                    discuss it soon with Assistant Secretary Tutwiler. The report recommended that
                    the coordination of the declassification process for <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> volumes, along with the necessary resources to do
                    the job, be shifted to the Historian’s Office.</p>
                <p>The Committee expressed its concerns about the redundancies and delays it had
                    identified in the current procedures for the systematic declassification of
                    Department records. Rogers agreed to look into three areas of concern:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) the mixture of annuitants and full-time personnel engaged in the
                            systematic declassification process;</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) the overall management of systematic declassification; and</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) the goals and attitudes of those charged with implementing systematic
                            declassification.</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="27" xml:id="pg_27" facs="0026"/>
                <table style="TableGrid" cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell>Compiled by RBaker</cell>
                        <cell>663-1139</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>PC Doc:</cell>
                        <cell>JULYMINS</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row rows="11">
                        <cell rows="11">Notetakers:</cell>
                        <cell>Rita M. Baker</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Paul Claussen</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Taylor Fain</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Vicki E. Futscher</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Nina Howland</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Edward C. Keefer</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>David w. Mabon</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>James E. Miller</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Nina J. Noring</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Charles S. Sampson</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Harriet D. Schwar</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row rows="7">
                        <cell rows="7">Clearances:</cell>
                        <cell>PA:GAKennedy</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>PA/HO:WZSlany</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>PA/HO:GWLaFantasie</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>DS/FPC/HDR:JHChaddic</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>EAP/J:JFScott</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>L/T:RBDalton</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>NARA:TPeterson</cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
                <p>Source: Lot 1999 D 0041, Box 1, Folder 1992 HAC Minutes of Meetings</p>
                <p>note: page 26 absent in paper record</p>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
