<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1992-03-26">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, March
                    1992</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1992</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1992-03-26">March 26, 1992</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <body>
            <pb n="1" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section" xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation_1">
                <head>ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTATION March 26-27,
                    1992</head>
                <p rend="center"><hi rend="underline">Participants</hi></p>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Committee members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Betty Glad</item>
                    <item>George Herring</item>
                    <item>Warren Kimball</item>
                    <item>Anna Nelson</item>
                    <item>Bradford Perkins</item>
                    <item>Jane Picker</item>
                    <item>Emily Rosenberg</item>
                    <item>Arnold Taylor</item>
                    <item>Anne Van Camp</item>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Deputy Assistant Secretary of State G. Alfred Kennedy</item>
                    <item>Susan Povenmire</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Office of the Historian (PA/HO)</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William Z. Slany</item>
                    <item>Glenn W. LaFantasie</item>
                    <item>Rita M. Baker</item>
                    <item>Paul Claussen</item>
                    <item>Vicki E. Futscher</item>
                    <item>Evans Gerakas</item>
                    <item>David H. Herschler</item>
                    <item>Edward C. Keefer</item>
                    <item>David W. Mabon</item>
                    <item>Nina J. Noring</item>
                    <item>David S. Patterson</item>
                    <item>Charles S. Sampson</item>
                    <item>William F. Sanford</item>
                    <item>Harriet D. Schwar</item>
                    <item>Jeffrey A. Soukup</item>
                    <item>Shirley Taylor</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Joe H. Chaddic, Chief, Historical Documents Review Division
                        (FPC/HDR)</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">National Archives and Records Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>John T. Fawcett, Assistant Archivist for Presidential Libraries</item>
                    <item>David A. Langbart</item>
                    <item>R. Michael McReynolds</item>
                    <item>Nancy Smith</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">National Security Council</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>David Van Tassel</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Other</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Page Putnam Miller</item>
                </list>
                <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0002"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--march-26--9-30-10-45_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, March 26, 9:30-10:45</hi></head>
                <p>The meeting convened at 9:30 a.m. Deputy Assistant Secretary for the Bureau of
                    Public Affairs Kennedy welcomed the Committee and said the Department of State
                    was working on implementing the new <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    legislation. He noted that the goals of the law were the same as the goals of
                    the agreed Action Plan which went into effect in February 1991. He said that the
                    law as well as a recent speech by CIA Director Gates denoted a “new spirit of
                    openness in Washington.”</p>
                <p>He described what had been accomplished by the Historical Office:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) an approved Charter of the Advisory Committee;</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) a draft inter-agency agreement on access; and</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) a long-term declassification and production schedule to reach the
                            30-year line.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>He concluded by noting that the Historical Office and the Department of State
                    want the Committee’s advice on these and other matters in its purview.</p>
                <p>Prof. Bradford Perkins nominated Prof. Warren Kimball as chairman of the Advisory
                    Committee; the nomination was seconded by Prof. Emily Rosenberg. The Committee
                    unanimously approved.</p>
                <p>Kimball called on William Z. Slany for the Historian’s report. Slany started by
                    discussing procedural matters: contracts for Committee members; note-taking and
                    minutes of the meeting; and security clearances. The clearances are not yet
                    completed, but all are entitled to Top Secret clearances and additional
                    clearances would be required by at least some members of the Committee in order
                    to fulfill their duties.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked about the reporting requirements called for in the legislation.
                    Slany indicated that Secretary Baker had delegated to Under Secretary for
                    Management Rogers, who had delegated to Assistant Secretary Tutwiler his
                    authority to choose Committee members. The Committee’s report with
                    recommendations regarding the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series
                    would go to Assistant Secretary Tutwiler. The Committee’s report regarding the
                    Department’s records would go to Under Secretary Rogers.</p>
                <p>Kimball, however, was reluctant to cede direct access to Secretary Baker, but
                    Kennedy repeated that Baker had delegated authority to Rogers for receipt of
                    reports of many of the Department’s advisory committees.</p>
                <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0003"/>
                <p>Prof. Anna Nelson wished to clarify that the newly-constituted Advisory Committee
                    on Historical Diplomatic Documentation had authority to review and make
                    recommendations on all the Department of State records and not just those used
                    in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series. Both Slany and
                    Kennedy confirmed this.</p>
                <p>Perkins reminded the Committee members of their obligation to report on the
                    Committee’s work to their respective organizations.</p>
                <p>Slany continued with his report on the implementation of the legislation in the
                    Department of State. He noted the coordination within the Department and with
                    other agencies, including the CIA and the NSC, for access to documentation. By
                    April 25, the Department of State must have access agreements with all agencies
                    that will provide documentation for the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series. These agreements call for the designation of liaison
                    officers or the implementation of procedures within agency historical offices to
                    facilitate access.</p>
                <p>Perkins began a discussion of possible conflicts regarding access between P. L.
                    102-138 and regulations governing access to documentation at the National
                    Archives and, particularly, the Presidential Libraries. John Fawcett, Assistant
                    Archivist for Presidential Libraries, explained the statutory obligation for
                    access to Presidential Libraries, and assured the Committee that there was no
                    conflict. The Committee members agreed that they would like to see the
                    agreements with the agencies when they are completed. If the Committee sees an
                    intent to evade the legislation, then it must decide how to respond.</p>
                <p>Kimball inquired whether the ambiguity of language in Section 404 (b)(3) of P. L.
                    102-138 could be interpreted to exclude from declassification an almost
                    indefinite amount of documentation. Slany explained that this section would be
                    interpreted in accord with existing declassification guidelines in Executive
                    Order 12356 and would not cause additional restriction of documents.</p>
                <p>Slany emphasized the big question: Can the 30-year line deadline be met under
                    current guidelines? The task of reaching the 30-year line in 5 years is
                    enormous: 74 volumes, print and microfiche, must be produced by 1996. Of these,
                    14 will be produced this year; 39-40 will be cleared in the next 3-4 years; and
                    16 volumes for the Kennedy years are being compiled. The Department realized
                    that this ambitious schedule called for in the Action Plan of February 1991,
                    would be very difficult to realize.</p>
                <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4" facs="0004"/>
                <p>In considering whether to increase the staff size of the Office of the Historian
                    commensurately with the increased workload, Slany expressed the opinion that
                    staff size was not the key to this issue, and that in any case the Department’s
                    historical staff was uniquely competent to complete the task. He reiterated that
                    the problem was foremost a managerial one.</p>
                <p>Slany asked for the Committee’s advice and/or endorsement of the overall scope of
                    the series. We must all recognize that the scope of the records is much greater
                    than can be included in the series. The Historical Office asks for advice on
                    what can or should be left out.</p>
                <p>At this time, access to records determines to some degree what is included in the
                    volumes. He would like the Committee’s input and involvement at any level --
                    documents, volumes, subseries -- regarding the scope of the series.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if the production schedule had been circulated to other agencies.
                    Slany replied that the Department of State does not yet have other agencies’
                    agreement on the schedule. He repeated that the Department was seeking written
                    agreements with agencies by April 25. Rosenberg requested status reports on
                    these interagency access agreements by April 25 as well as copies of the
                    agreements.</p>
                <p>Nelson noted that it might be very useful to private researchers if the
                    production schedule were circulated to the professional societies to publish in
                    their newsletters. The target dates in the schedule might help researchers in
                    making FOI requests.</p>
                <p>Prof. George Herring recalled that some years ago delays at the Government
                    Printing Office were causing problems. Deputy Historian Glenn LaFantasie noted
                    that the Department of State was revising its arrangements with the GPO and
                    exploring the possibility of a waiver. He was also instituting new procedures to
                    improve efficiency within the Office.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie reported three future trends in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) A necessary reduction in coverage: Johnson administration volumes
                            would be 800 print pages long.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) A reduction in the number of volumes: there were 75 volumes covering
                            the Eisenhower administration but only about 30 for the Kennedy years
                            and 33 for the Johnson administration.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) Beginning with the Johnson administration, microfiche would not be
                            used to publish.</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0005"/>
                <p>The Committee was concerned about the elimination of microfiche, with the
                    significantly reduced published documentation. Slany reminded them that
                    compiling, declassifying, and publishing such large amounts of documentation,
                    even in microfiche, was virtually impossible under the legislative
                    timetable.</p>
                <p>The meeting recessed at 10:45 for a coffee break.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--march-26--11-00-12-15_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, March 26, 11:00-12:15</hi></head>
                <p>Prof. Betty Glad questioned how it would be possible to reconcile the planned
                    smaller scope of the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series with the
                    legislative mandate for the series to be complete and accurate.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie provided an overview of proposed modified research methodology for the
                    series. He pointed out that Department historians will have to be more efficient
                    in the research. This will require more careful planning and greater selectivity
                    during the research and coordination among the staff to avoid duplicating
                    research in particular files. The planning for the content of volumes will have
                    to be adjusted during the course of research as compilers become more
                    knowledgeable about particular issues and about the historical record. The
                    legislative mandate for the series to be accurate represents a formidable
                    intellectual challenge. The Office will have to devise selection principles and
                    will welcome advice from the Committee about this. The series will have to
                    provide in the front matter detailed bibliographical information about the
                    historical record and also explain why certain issues have been documented and
                    why others have not. Meeting the legislative mandate will require adopting
                    improved documentary editing methodology, much of which has become standard in
                    the profession.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested that the Historian’s Office provide something in writing on
                    this concept.</p>
                <p>Glad thought it would be useful to examine a particular volume planned for the
                    Johnson administration. Kimball said the Committee needed to look at the
                    philosophical issues in planning the series, i.e., what is the audience for the
                    series? Nelson suggested that an examination of a planned Johnson volume would
                    lead to an understanding of general principles.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg stated that it would be difficult for the Committee to examine the
                    content outlines for the Johnson volumes unless there was some form of
                    presentation by experts, such as the compilers. The Committee should focus on
                    how this process could be done for the Johnson volumes before the research plans
                    had been fully developed.</p>
                <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6" facs="0006"/>
                <p>Kimball said that perhaps the Committee should divide itself into subcommittees
                    to study the Johnson volume outlines and present its findings to the full
                    Committee. He inquired when the right time would be for the Committee to get
                    involved in evaluating the plans for the Johnson volumes. Slany responded that
                    now is the time to determine if any major issues had been omitted from the
                    outline.</p>
                <p>Glad moved that the Advisory Committee discuss the content outline for the
                    Johnson volume entitled “Confrontation in Southeast Asia” as a test sample.
                    Nelson seconded the motion.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie said that a substantive discussion could not be undertaken at present.
                    The outlines for the Johnson volumes are preliminary; not all volumes had been
                    scoped out by the historians. Rosenberg stated that it was better to discuss the
                    overall layout of the volumes and determine if supplements would be required.
                    Slany said that the concept of having the compilers prepare content analyses of
                    planned volumes was part of the Department’s Action Plan of February 1991.
                    Perhaps these could be prepared by the next meeting.</p>
                <p>Anne Van Camp stated that the Committee needed to differentiate between process
                    and philosophy. It was essential to understand the research and editing
                    methodology. The Committee needed to agree on whether the series was headed in
                    the right direction before they examine individual volumes.</p>
                <p>The Committee discussed the feasibility of examining content outlines for
                    individual volumes. Perkins stated that the Committee probably did not possess
                    sufficient expertise to assess the content outline of all Johnson volumes. It
                    might be necessary to bring in experts to do this. Prof. Arnold Taylor agreed
                    that this may be necessary, but said that he assumed the Johnson outline is
                    based on the expertise of Department historians. He thought it would be helpful
                    to look at individual volumes.</p>
                <p>Prof. Jane Picker asked about the interrelationship among volumes. For example,
                    the Johnson volume on national security policy and the volume on the
                    administration of foreign policy includes the role of CIA and DIA (Defense
                    Intelligence Agency). If such issues are omitted from geographical volumes, to
                    what extent would they be cross-referenced? These questions relate directly to
                    researchers’ ability to get at central topics.</p>
                <p>David Mabon then briefly outlined the Johnson volume entitled “Confrontation in
                    Southeast Asia.” He said this outline was very preliminary and that there had to
                    be flexibility in the basic plan until the historians get into the <pb n="7"
                        xml:id="pg_7" facs="0007"/> records. In response to a question on coverage
                    of possible covert operations in this volume, Mabon stated that the Office of
                    the Historian now would have access to such documentation, but the volume was
                    planned to cover policy, not operational issues. Slany pointed out that the
                    Historian’s Office still did not know for certain whether the CIA would adhere
                    to this principle.</p>
                <p>The Committee discussed access by Department historians to finding aids,
                    particularly those of the CIA. Mabon indicated that up to now, the historians
                    only had access to finding aids at the Presidential Libraries, not to any
                    finding aid system at the CIA, if such exists. Herring stated that even the CIA
                    historians do not have full access to agency finding aids. Kimball indicated
                    that this was perhaps a problem that should be addressed within the context of
                    the legislation.</p>
                <p>Slany stated that materials at the Presidential Libraries were key to the series
                    and it was important to get these documents declassified and open to public
                    research. Yet it would be impossible for Department historians to look at every
                    document at the Johnson Library. Fawcett indicated that all White House
                    materials except for NSC institutional documents go to the Presidential
                    libraries.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that the Committee might need to make a statement on access to
                    finding aids. David Langbart of the National Archives warned the group not to
                    assume that every agency had good and useful finding aids. This was not the
                    case.</p>
                <p>Nelson indicated that the Department of Energy was another problem agency because
                    it operated under separate legislation. Slany said that it would probably be
                    necessary to deal with DOE separately on access to DOE documents. Perkins
                    pointed out that this would also likely be necessary with NSA.</p>
                <p>Van Camp maintained that the Committee could not be an advisory board and an
                    editorial board at the same time. The most immediate need was for the Committee
                    to be an advisory board and address the big questions for the series. She posed
                    three central questions:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) What is the principal purpose of the series -- who are the
                        users?</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) What is the nature of the historical record and how will this affect
                            the size of the series?</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) What are the potential choke points in meeting the schedule deadlines
                            and how can these be alleviated?</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Kennedy agreed with Van Camp’s suggested approach.</p>
                <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0008"/>
                <p>A discussion ensued on the principal purpose of the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series. Perkins said the series had two audiences:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) scholars who use it as a foundation for serious research
                        and</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) beginning graduate students. He said the series should touch on all
                            subjects but not evenly across the board. He thought that was more
                            important than total in-depth treatment. Herring thought that the series
                            should provide a comprehensive overview rather than any in-depth
                            coverage. Nelson thought some volumes deserved more in-depth treatment
                            than others.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>The preliminary sense of the Committee was that the volumes should strike a
                    balance between presenting documentation on key issues and serving as a more
                    comprehensive finding aid to the larger documentary record.</p>
                <p>Picker asked about consultation with the Office of the Legal Adviser and the Law
                    Digest. Slany responded that the Office of the Historian was trying to draw in
                    the Legal Adviser’s records, that there was an audience for international law
                    cases.</p>
                <p>The open meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12:15.</p>
                <quote rendition="blockquote">
                    <p>[The Committee, together with Kennedy, Slany, LaFantasie, Records Historian
                        David Herschler, and Special Assistant Susan Povenmire continued informal
                        discussions on the morning’s agenda during a working luncheon. No record of
                        this session was maintained.]</p></quote>
                <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0009"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-meeting--march-26--2-00-3-30_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Meeting, March 26, 2:00-3:30</hi></head>
                <list>
                    <head><hi rend="underline">Participants</hi></head>
                    <item>Members of the Advisory Committee</item>
                    <item>Representatives of the Office of the Historian</item>
                    <item>
                        <list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></head>
                            <item>Assistant Secretary Margaret DeB. Tutwiler</item>
                            <item>Senior Deputy Assistant Secretary Grace Moe</item>
                            <item>Deputy Assistant Secretary G. Alfred Kennedy</item>
                            <item>Susan Povenmire</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></head>
                            <item>Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information Management
                                and Systems Operations Warren E. Littrel</item>
                            <item>Joe H. Chaddic (FPC/HDR)</item>
                            <item>Kenneth Rossman (IM/OIS/RM)</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Others</hi></head>
                            <item>George C. Chalou, National Archives</item>
                            <item>John T. Fawcett, National Archives</item>
                            <item>David A. Langbart, National Archives</item>
                            <item>R. Michael McReynolds, National Archives</item>
                            <item>James W. Moore, Assistant Archivist for Records Administration,
                                National Archives</item>
                            <item>Nancy Smith, National Archives</item>
                            <item>David Van Tassel, National Security Council</item>
                        </list></item>
                </list>
                <p>Chairman Kimball called the meeting to order and introduced Department Spokesman
                    and Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Margaret Tutwiler.</p>
                <p>Ms. Tutwiler welcomed the Advisory Committee to the Department and contratulated
                    the chairman on his election. The new legislation was challenging and difficult,
                    but she assured the Committee that the Bureau of Public Affairs and Secretary of
                    State were solidly behind it and stated that she would do all she could to see
                    that it was faithfully executed. The effort would benefit from the support of
                    Deputy Secretary Eagleburger and Under Secretary Rogers and the work of the
                    Committee. She welcomed recommendations from the Committee.</p>
                <p>Warren Littrel, Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary for Information Management
                    and Operations, welcomed the Committee and expressed his appreciation for the
                    meeting. He indicated that the Office of Information Management (IM) was doing
                    all it could to facilitate declassification of the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series. IM was also actively participating with the
                    Department, other agencies, and foreign governments to <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10"
                        facs="0010"/> facilitate the opening of the files at a 30-year line. The
                    Department was entering a new era in applying new technology to information
                    management. Over 1,750,000 telegrams are handled annually; the Department’s
                    electronic database includes over 17,000,000 documents. Through rapid
                    communications and retrieval systems, the Secretary of State can see almost any
                    document instantaneously. The <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    legislation comes at an important time, because it ties in with the Department’s
                    efforts to improve information management, and fosters better Congressional and
                    public understanding of our foreign policy goals and objectives. Littrel looked
                    forward to the Committee’s counsel and advice.</p>
                <p>Joe Chaddic, Director of the Historical Documents Review Division (HDR),
                    explained the process in HDR for reviewing <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> compilations. When HDR received a compilation, it assigned a
                    reviewer who read each page and determined the compilation’s releasability in
                    consultation with the Department’s geographic and functional bureaus. He then
                    sent specific documents or portions of the compilation to other agencies and
                    foreign governments for their concurrence in the release of material which they
                    initiated or in which they had an interest. After declassification decisions had
                    been reached on this material, HDR sent the compilation to the NSC. Chaddic
                    reported that in the last 12 months, HDR had received final clearances on 13
                    volumes, that it had completed preliminary clearances on an additional 12, and
                    was in the process of clearing another 9 volumes. He noted that this performance
                    represented an improvement from several years ago, and he expressed his ongoing
                    desire to achieve the goals of the legislation.</p>
                <p>In addition to the increased efficiency of HDR, Chaddic stated that several other
                    developments promised to speed up <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    declassification. HDR has assigned two reviewers to the NSC to assist that
                    agency in its review of manuscripts. He also reported that the NSC has recently
                    agreed to accept manuscripts before foreign government clearances have been
                    completed. This change was especially significant because it allowed manuscripts
                    to take their place in line for NSC review while at the same time awaiting
                    foreign government action. Chaddic also stated that United Kingdom interest in a
                    large number of compilations led him to send a reviewer to that country to
                    expedite U.K. clearance of 26 documents that had been pending for some time and
                    to negotiate arrangements for future declassification. HDR had also successfully
                    persuaded the OECD to place its documents on a 30-year declassification
                    schedule. That organization recently agreed to release its 30-year old documents
                    this June and every year from now on. He also reported that Alan Thompson,
                    former Director of the Records Declassification Division at the National
                    Archives had prepared, under contract, a draft plan to bring NATO to a <pb
                        n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0011"/> 30-year declassification schedule. A
                    major meeting is planned for May 13, 1992. Chaddic believed that with the
                    breakup of the Soviet Union, it would be harder for NATO authorities to withhold
                    documents for long periods of time.</p>
                <p>Chaddic described the process for declassification of the Department’s records.
                    When the State Department transferred the Central Files to the National
                    Archives, it also provided guidelines for the declassification of these records.
                    NARA then tagged and withheld all documents warranting continued protection. HDR
                    subsequently reviewed a random sampling of untagged documents to check on the
                    effectiveness of the system. The declassification review of the 1955-1959 block
                    had just been completed and all but 16 percent of the classified documents had
                    been released. HDR was currently writing the guidelines for the 1960-1963 block,
                    having completed about 40 percent of the major regions. NARA will soon begin
                    reviewing documents for Africa and South America. The Department of State will
                    transfer between $150,000 and $200,000 to the National Archives to help the
                    initial review of the 1960-1963 files. Chaddic welcomed the Committee’s interest
                    in viewing withheld material as an opportunity for him to give credibility to
                    the declassification process, expressing confidence that he could convince the
                    Committee that HDR’s reasons for withholding information were valid.</p>
                <p>Ken Rossman, Director of the Department’s Records Management Staff, described the
                    various categories of records and record blocks in the Department, and their
                    retirement in set blocks by periods of years. The 1960-1963 block of the
                    Department’s Central File posed challenges. During this period, the record
                    filing system went from the decimal to the subject-numeric system. Secret,
                    confidential, and unclassified documents had been filed separately and would
                    have to be combined before the files could be accessioned by the National
                    Archives. He explained that there were 1,900 cubic feet of Central Files for the
                    period. He added that 250 cubic feet of 30-year-old Lot files in the Top Secret
                    vault would soon be appraised for permanent retention, along with Department
                    post files preceding 1964.</p>
                <p>Rossman also described what records managers were doing to make things easier 30
                    years from now with respect to paper records from 1964 to the present, and the
                    electronic central files covering the years since 1973. He noted that the
                    present system has all cable traffic on line, and that he is hopeful of
                    eliminating routine administrative cables to reduce the burden of using the
                    system. He mentioned his intention to persuade NARA to eventually take
                    electronic instead of microfilm records. He indicated that digital imaging and
                    CD-ROM were likely future applications of dissemination of the Department’s
                    records.</p>
                <pb n="12" xml:id="pg_12" facs="0012"/>
                <p>Nelson asked Chaddic whether the NSC reviewed all or only portions of each
                    compilation, to which he replied that the NSC only reviewed those documents in
                    which it had an interest. She asked what percentage of 1940-1959 Department of
                    State lot files were open; Chaddic did not have the figures. Nelson then
                    inquired whether guidelines were applied to Lot files and Post files as well as
                    to Central files; Chaddic indicated that they were.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked if seeing the guidelines would be a good way for Committee members
                    to understand the declassification problem. Chaddic indicated that it would be.
                    Kimball asked if Committee members could review newly-prepared guidelines, and
                    Chaddic said they would be more than welcome to do so. There was a further
                    discussion of the preparation of guidelines and the process whereby they were
                    cleared by geographic and functional bureaus.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg asked whether there was any systematic re-review of denied documents,
                    such as the 16 percent that could not be released from the 1955-1959 record
                    block and whether the Committee could play a useful role in this review. Chaddic
                    replied that the 1960-1963 guidelines were the best indication of what could now
                    be released; nevertheless, previously denied material would not be reviewed
                    again until an FOI request had been initiated. He said that every year or two
                    the guidelines given to NARA for earlier record blocks were routinely modified
                    to reflect the latest declassification decisions. These revisions were also
                    promulgated to the Presidential Libraries. Perkins proposed following the
                    British practice of regularly reviewing denied documents every 5 years and
                    putting the burden of proving the need for continuing classification on those
                    who wished the documents to remain classified. Chaddic replied that his division
                    simply did not have the resources to implement such a periodic review.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked what constituted foreign government information. Chaddic replied
                    that it mostly consisted of foreign originated material or in some cases direct
                    quotes. It did not necessarily include memoranda of conversation. He added that
                    foreign government documents were not cleared with unfriendly governments or
                    governments no longer in existence.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked Chaddic if he would consult the Committee on an HDR draft report to
                    Congress on declassification and transfer to the National Archives of the
                    Department’s 30-year-old records due 180 days from the enactment of the
                    legislation. Chaddic said he would have no objection to sharing the report with
                    the Committee once the draft had been revised.</p>
                <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0013"/>
                <p>In response to Van Camp’s question of whether an accelerated pace of
                    declassification could be maintained in the future, Chaddic replied that it
                    could. He added, in response to Kimball’s question, that he saw no conflict
                    between the production schedule of <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    and the declassification requirements mandated by the new legislation. Kimball
                    then asked Chaddic whether he foresaw anything that might set back the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> production schedule, to which he
                    responded: “unqualifyingly no.”</p>
                <p>In response to a further question, which prompted extended discussion among the
                    Committee members, Chaddic stated that deciding whether to send State Department
                    documents for clearance to other agencies was generally not difficult as other
                    agency equity was fairly clear.</p>
                <p>On the question of how historians would deal with electronic records in the
                    future, Slany stated that the Office had not really had an opportunity to focus
                    fully on the issue yet. Some years ago, the Office had experimented with on-line
                    compiling from the Department’s electronic Central File of contemporary
                    documents for <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, but this effort had
                    been preliminary and could not progress further until more could be learned
                    about the system and the process. Mr. Herschler indicated that there were
                    significant retrieval problems with the existing electronic Central File, and
                    that the Department had been working on a new system for some time. He expressed
                    the hope that an improved system for retrieval would be developed before <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> compiling began for the years 1973
                    and beyond.</p>
                <p>The Committee recessed at 3:30 for a coffee break.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--march-26--3-40-5-00_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, March 26, 3:40-5:00</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball announced a change in the agenda. The consideration of the 1958-1960
                    Japan compilation would be handled by a subcommittee consisting of Glad,
                    Herring, and Taylor who would examine the compilation and report their findings
                    at the next meeting of the Committee. Kimball suggested that the Committee use
                    the time after 2 p.m. on Friday to discuss and decide upon its organizational
                    guidelines and procedures for implementing the legislation.</p>
                <p>Picker inquired why only one session of the meeting was open while the rest were
                    closed to the public and wondered if this was the intent of the law. Slany and
                    Kimball explained that the Committee could go into executive session. Picker
                    also expressed concern that as one of the new members of the Committee she would
                    like to have additional briefings from Department of State and other officials
                    on declassification procedures and regulations. There was a general view that
                    the new members should have further orientation.</p>
                <pb n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0014"/>
                <p>Slany introduced John Fawcett, Assistant Archivist for Presidential Libraries.
                    Slany indicated that the Office of the Historian had been working closely with
                    the Kennedy and Johnson libraries and with NARA on implementation of the
                    legislation, and much progress had been made.</p>
                <p>Fawcett explained that Presidential papers from this period are legally
                    considered personal donated historical materials. Rules and regulations
                    concerning them are to some extent more complex than those of Federal records.
                    In addition to national security concerns regulated by Executive Order 12356,
                    these materials are subject to deed of gift considerations. Information in
                    Presidential materials also represents equities from a number of government
                    agencies whose permission is required for access by Department historians.</p>
                <p>The Presidential Libraries have worked with the Office of the Historian over the
                    last few years in trying to streamline the procedures involved in making
                    material available for <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> research.
                    Previously, the processing done for Department historians was the full
                    processing done to make the collection available for research by the public.
                    This included reviewing the materials for donor-deed-of gift restrictions;
                    preservation; identifying and closing marked and unmarked classified items;
                    segregating all open and closed materials; identifying documents that have
                    previously been declassified and marking these items; and preparing document
                    withdrawal sheets for all closed material.</p>
                <p>To expedite access by Department historians for <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> research, in the past few years the Presidential Libraries
                    have performed partial processing of the materials which does not include
                    completing all the steps necessary to open the collections to the public. Most
                    classified material is not segregated; previously declassified items are not
                    marked; review for donor’s deed-of-gift is not done for most documents; and the
                    withdrawal sheets which provide the information for the researcher to make
                    mandatory review requests are not completed. Given the current legislative
                    mandate which accelerates the schedule for <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi>, the Johnson Library might not be as responsive to full
                    processing of foreign policy files or mandatory review requests during the
                    4-year period in which the Library would be giving the necessary priority to
                    abbreviated processing for <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    research.</p>
                <p>Glad asked why the Presidential Libraries could not simultaneously open files for
                    public use while processing the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    requests. Fawcett emphasized that the work done on the files for <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> researchers was geared to the
                    individuals involved and their particular needs and clearances. Once the
                    Department historians’ research was completed the files had to be reviewed for
                    donor restrictions and classification, open and closed materials need to be
                    segregated, and the withdrawal sheets must be completed.</p>
                <pb n="15" xml:id="pg_15" facs="0015"/>
                <p>Taylor called attention to the lag time between declassification of documents for
                        <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> and their publication. Were the
                    declassified documents immediately made available at the libraries and the
                    National Archives or was it necessary to wait until publication of the volumes?
                    Fawcett explained that they could not necessarily make a document available just
                    because it seemed to be published in <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                    Relations</hi>, because sometimes there were differences between several copies
                    of the same document. Guidelines were needed for them to make documents
                    available. Herschler pointed out that a database was now in existence for the
                    Kennedy volumes and beyond that would provide a list of which documents from
                    Presidential Libraries had been declassified for <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> volumes, and that a printout would be sent to the
                    Presidential libraries so that those documents could be made immediately
                    available. Nelson asked if this list would be sent to NARA in Washington?
                    Herschler indicated that it would.</p>
                <p>Nelson pointed out that a number of documents in Presidential Libraries contain
                    no classification marking. Fawcett said that the White House is the worst
                    offender in this area and that care must be taken as some very sensitive
                    documents have no markings. In response to Nelson’s inquiry, Fawcett indicated
                    that all White House foreign policy documents had to be cleared with the
                    NSC.</p>
                <p>Perkins wondered whether archival staff at some of the libraries where processing
                    had been substantially completed --such as the Truman or Eisenhower Libraries --
                    could be transferred to the Johnson. Fawcett explained that the government
                    cannot precipitously fire people or require them to move, except at great
                    expense. Once someone resigns or retires the slot can then be moved. He then
                    provided the following breakdown of the total number of pages of classified
                    material at the libraries:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>Truman -- 150,000</item>
                    <item>Eisenhower -- 350,000</item>
                    <item>Kennedy -- 1 million</item>
                    <item>Johnson -- 2 million</item>
                    <item>Nixon -- 2 million</item>
                    <item>Ford -- 600,000</item>
                    <item>Carter -- 2.5 million</item>
                    <item>Reagan -- 4-5 million</item>
                </list>
                <p>Fawcett also said that there were still a small number of documents at the
                    Roosevelt Library that remained classified. The older ones were mainly
                    intelligence documents.</p>
                <pb n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0016"/>
                <p>There was a long discussion of what constitituted equities in a document. In
                    response to an inquiry by Picker, Chaddic said he did not think that there was
                    any written definition. In general, equity could be defined as that information
                    in a document in which another agency has a legitimate concern. George Chalou
                    said NARA’s practice was to return to the agency of origin to determine equity.
                    Kimball expressed surprise that the State Department did not let the originating
                    agency decide equity and that there were not articulated procedures. Chaddic
                    said other agencies trusted the State Department to protect their equity. The
                    documents that an agency originated were always returned to it for
                    declassification. David Langbart explained that when one government agency
                    talked about the activities of another government agency the second agency had
                    an equity in the document of the first agency.</p>
                <p>Kimball raised the question of whether the Department’s current procedure was
                    making declassification more difficult. Why not just let the originating agency
                    define which other agencies had equity? Chaddic pointed out that all documents
                    in <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> have State Department equity and
                    that the process would be slowed down if the other agency equity decision were
                    deferred to each agency. Also, frequently when State sends a document to another
                    agency it points out that the State Department does not object to its
                    declassification and this helps facilitate the other agency decision.</p>
                <p>In response to a question from Nelson, Fawcett confirmed that all White House
                    documents were sent to the NSC, after being cleared by State or CIA, as
                    appropriate. David Van Tassel of the NSC staff said that this is because NSC
                    plays a coordinator role.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked what in addition to the interagency agreements the Department
                    Historian was now negotiating with other agencies would be helpful to the
                    Presidential Libraries in their access and declassification responsibilities?
                    Fawcett emphasized that working with the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> historians would be a full-time job for the Presidential
                    Library staffs. A good interagency agreement would facilitate the job, as would
                    any procedures that would shorten the time Department historians spend at the
                    libraries. He also discussed the special circumstances of the Nixon materials.
                    President Nixon retained a veto over who could see the files.</p>
                <p>Committee members continued to express concern over suspension of work at the
                    libraries on mandatory review requests in order to meet the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> schedule. Nancy Smith pointed out that at the
                    Kennedy Library mandatory review was suspended for a time. Nelson asked about
                    conducting systematic declassification review at the libraries. Fawcett said
                    that the NSC conducted such a review at the Eisenhower Library some years ago
                    and was talking about sending someone to the Johnson Library.</p>
                <pb n="17" xml:id="pg_17" facs="0017"/>
                <p>Kimball asked if the Presidential Libraries used State Department guidelines and,
                    if so, how effective they were. Fawcett explained that because Presidential
                    materials were so complex, it was difficult to apply the Department’s
                    guidelines. Chaddic stated that the Department’s guidelines, nevertheless, were
                    the best in the Federal government.</p>
                <p>Picker inquired about secret treaties and how the public was informed when one
                    was declassified? Slany noted that in the past they had been declassified and
                    printed in <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>. The Historian’s Office
                    would try to strike a deal with the Department’s Legal Adviser to ensure that
                    they are included in the series. It was also true that some executive agreements
                    were not sent to NARA. Kimball said that the Committee would address this
                    problem.</p>
                <p>Michael McReynolds of the National Archives’ Civil Reference Division said a few
                    words about NARA’s move to the new building in College Park. He indicated that
                    the 1960-1963 State Department records would remain at Suitland until the move
                    was completed.</p>
                <p>It was agreed that some representatives from NARA would return on Friday. The
                    meeting recessed at 4:50 p.m.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--march-27--9-10-10-30_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, March 27, 9:10-10:30</hi></head>
                <list>
                    <head><hi rend="underline">Participants</hi></head>
                    <item>Members of the Advisory Committee</item>
                    <item>Representatives of the Office of the Historian</item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></head>
                            <item>Senior Deputy Assistant Secretary Grace Moe</item>
                            <item>Deputy Assistant Secretary G. Alfred Kennedy</item>
                            <item>Susan Povenmire</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></head>
                            <item>Jacqueline Baker (DS/PRD/IF)</item>
                            <item>Joe H. Chaddic (FPC/HDR)</item>
                            <item>Kenneth Rossman (IM/OIS/RM)</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Others</hi></head>
                            <item>George C. Chalou, National Archives</item>
                            <item>John T. Fawcett, National Archives</item>
                            <item>David A. Langbart, National Archives</item>
                            <item>Mary McAuliffe, Central Intelligence Agency</item>
                            <item>J. Kenneth McDonald, Central Intelligence Agency</item>
                            <item>Nancy Smith, National Archives</item>
                            <item>David Van Tassel, National Security Council</item>
                        </list></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="18" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0018"/>
                <p>Chairman Kimball convened the meeting at 9:12 a.m. The first order of business
                    was a security briefing by Jacqueline Baker of the Division of Information
                    Security, Office of Procedural Security, Bureau of Diplomatic Security
                    (DS/PRD/IF). After considerable description of standard security procedures,
                    Baker distributed a form in which the members undertook not to willfully reveal
                    any classified information received by them as a result of their Committee
                    duties. In reply to an expression of concern by the Committee regarding the
                    impact of this undertaking, Baker emphasized that it would have reference <hi
                        rend="underline">only</hi> to information received as a direct result of
                    their Committee activities. The government must prove that an attempt had been
                    made to purposefully circumvent the non-disclosure agreement. To her knowledge,
                    no request for publication submitted under the terms of this agreement had ever
                    been disapproved.</p>
                <p>Kimball then proposed, and the Committee agreed, to add to the morning’s agenda,
                    without deleting any other items, a presentation by David Langbart of NARA on
                    records retirement and administration issues.</p>
                <p>J. Kenneth McDonald, Chief of the History Staff of the Central Intelligence
                    Agency, then described the reorganization of the Agency’s Historical Review
                    Program according to new policies that the Director of Central Intelligence
                    (DCI), Robert Gates, outlined in a speech to the Oklahoma Press Association on
                    February 21 (copies distributed to the Committee). The DCI has appointed David
                    Gries, former Vice Chariman of the National Intelligence Council, Director of
                    CIA’s Center for the Study of Intelligence (CSI), which will be expanded to
                    about 40 people, and placed in the Office of the DCI. In CSI a new Historical
                    Review Group (HRG) of about 20 people will be responsible for systematic
                    declassification review of all CIA records over 30 years old (with the exception
                    of certain operational files), as well as for the review of all National
                    Intelligence Estimates on the former Soviet Union over 10 years old, collections
                    of CIA records on special topics (such as specific covert operations), and CIA
                    records that the State Department proposes to publish in compiled volumes of the
                        <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series. (Mandatory Review, FOIA,
                    and Privacy cases will continue to be handled by CIA’s Directorate of
                    Administration, as before.) McDonald emphasized that the DCI has directed the
                    Historical Review Program to have a “bias toward declassification,” and that
                    records reviewed under it will be declassified unless their disclosure
                    reasonably can be expected to cause damage to the national security. He noted
                    that since 1984 the CIA has declassified and transferred to the National
                    Archives almost all -- some 4800 cubic feet -- of its Office of Strategic
                    Services (OSS) operational records.</p>
                <pb n="19" xml:id="pg_19" facs="0019"/>
                <p>The CIA History Staff, expanded to about 15 people in CSI, will select groups of
                    records for systematic review, assemble documents on special topics for review,
                    and locate and arrange access to CIA records for State Department historians
                    compiling <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. The expansion of
                    the History Staff will provide more resources for CIA’s support of State
                    Department historians, as required by the new legislation. McDonald noted that
                    the formal agreement concerning access procedures will be concluded by the April
                    25 legislative deadline. In fact, the CIA History Staff began its voluntary
                    program of providing direct access for State historians to Agency records in
                    January 1991. In the future these historians will have access not only to Agency
                    records, but also to finding aids, in so far as comprehensive finding aids are
                    available.</p>
                <p>McDonald is co-chairman of a DCI Task Force that is preparing new Historical
                    Review Program declassification guidelines to govern the review of CIA’s
                    records, including those proposed for publication in the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. Documents that might previously have been
                    withheld from declassification because they fell into a category automatically
                    eligible for protection, will now be reviewed individually, and denied only if
                    specific damage to national security can be shown. McDonald stated his high
                    optimism about the total impact of the changes he had outlined.</p>
                <p>McDonald emphasized that relations between CIA’s History Staff and Department of
                    State historians had been excellent since he had joined CIA and the History
                    Staff in 1981. Since that time, he had approved every Department of State
                    request for historians to have direct access to CIA records at the History
                    Staff, as well as every request for State historians’ access to CIA classified
                    documentation at the several Presidential libraries. Since January 1991, at
                    State’s request after the flap over the Iran 1951-1954 volume, the CIA History
                    Staff has systematically arranged direct access to Agency records for State
                    historians compiling <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. These
                    arrangements have worked well, although the History Staff has lacked the
                    personnel needed to process quickly the very large number of documents that
                    State historians have requested.</p>
                <p>Mary McAuliffe, Deputy Chief of the History Staff, spoke next, calling CIA’s new
                    policy of openness and rules governing historical declassification
                    “revolutionary.” She cautioned, however, that CIA records are voluminous and
                    decentralized; it is tough to find records and even difficult to find out “how
                    they are kept.” The declassification process will be aided by the creation of a
                    new information database.</p>
                <pb n="20" xml:id="pg_20" facs="0020"/>
                <p>Rosenberg asked if the April 25 deadline imposed by the legislation for reaching
                    a CIA-State access agreement would be met, and McDonald replied that it would.
                    The coordination, he explained, would be managed through the Center for the
                    Study of Intelligence. McDonald noted that although Department compilers since
                    1977 have had direct access to all CIA records at the Presidential Libraries,
                    CIA in the past has required that these libraries send copies of documents
                    selected by State historians to the History Staff for CIA review (and in some
                    cases, denial of copies) before they can be released to the State Department.
                    This procedure will be revised, of course, to conform to the new
                    legislation.</p>
                <p>In response to Nelson’s question about possible obstruction to the new program by
                    “some elements of CIA,” McDonald pointed out that for records under the
                    Historical Review Program, the DCI had transferred declassification authority
                    from the originating offices in CIA to the Director of CSI. Noting her concern
                    with the use of annuitants (retired employees) in State’s declassification
                    program and possible conflicts of interest, Nelson expressed the hope that CIA
                    would not use annuitants in its new HRG. McDonald explained that CIA would in
                    fact use both GS-13 staff employees as well as annuitants as HRG reviewers. In
                    general, however, he did not expect the program to engage retired officers who
                    had worked in previous CIA declassification programs.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked about the procedure for preparing the document summaries as
                    specified in the legislation. McDonald replied that while he believed that
                    summaries would fill a useful role, there would no doubt be instances when even
                    a summary of a highly sensitive document might not be acceptable to the CIA.</p>
                <p>Van Camp asked what the CIA had already transferred to the National Archives
                    under the Historical Review Program. McDonald pointed out that two important
                    early histories declassified and released in 1989 and 1990 had since been
                    published by Penn State Press, and that some 10,000 pages of documents related
                    to these histories had been transferred to NARA in 1991. George Chalou of NARA
                    offered his opinion that the CIA histories transferred to NARA were useful, but
                    the latest series, the Historical Source documents, were of minimal research
                    quality. Noting that DCI Gates had characterized the transfers so far as
                    “meager,” McDonald gave his view that the DCI’s new policies, calling for a bias
                    toward declassification and a presumption for disclosure, would make a
                    substantial difference in the amount of material declassified and transferred to
                    the National Archives.</p>
                <pb n="21" xml:id="pg_21" facs="0021"/>
                <p>In response to a question by Picker, McDonald said that some documents relating
                    to such subjects as counterintelligence, human sources, and methods of handling
                    defectors, would be unlikely to be declassified. He did expect, however, that
                    CIA’s new guidelines would permit for the first time the declassification of
                    significant information concerning covert operations up to the early 1960s.</p>
                <p>The Committee recessed for a coffee break at 10:35.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--march-27--10-45-12-00_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, March 27, 10:45 12:00</hi></head>
                <p>After the break, the Committee continued their discussion with Kenneth McDonald,
                    Chief of the CIA History Staff.</p>
                <p>In response to Herring’s question, McDonald noted that while the CIA has no
                    central index to its records (because of security compartmentalization), he
                    expected the new Historical Review Program to prepare all-Agency finding aids.
                    The moratorium since last December on Department of State historians’ research
                    at the CIA History Staff will continue until State and CIA conclude their
                    memorandum of understanding concerning the new access procedures. He noted that
                    the CIA History Staff was using the respite to process a large backlog of
                    records requested in State historians’ visits over the past year, and there was
                    no point in asking CIA components for more documents until the new access
                    procedures are in place. To speed its expansion, he explained, the History Staff
                    hoped to recruit several new historians from inside CIA who already have the
                    necessary clearances. Until the History Staff has additional historians, support
                    staff, and larger quarters, it will probably continue to ask that only one State
                    historian visit at a time.</p>
                <p>Glad asked whether the new law required meetings if differences existed between
                    the Department Historian and the other agencies. McDonald expected that such
                    meetings would be a sensible way to solve problems. Glad also inquired whether
                    notes in the printed volumes will indicate if important material had been
                    denied, or the integrity of the record was compromised. Slany remarked that the
                    Historian’s Office would try to include as much of an explanation as possible,
                    but that it had to be guided by the originating agencies.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked how much indication the volumes would give if documents are
                    deleted. Slany said that would have to be worked out with the originating
                    agency.</p>
                <pb n="22" xml:id="pg_22" facs="0022"/>
                <p>Kimball asked if CIA documents from the Presidential Libraries will still have to
                    be reviewed by CIA before Department historians can get copies. McDonald
                    responded that CIA will reorganize -- and probably eliminate -- that step to
                    conform to the new legislation. Kimball also asked whether access was limited to
                    specific geographic areas. McDonald replied that the History Staff would arrange
                    full and complete access for State historians to all CIA records relevant to the
                    volume being compiled. Nancy Smith commented that other classifying agencies
                    also restricted access to specific areas. Kimball noted that the Committee will
                    probably raise the issue of agency review of copies of documents selected by
                    Department historians prior to compilation of volumes with respect to both the
                    CIA and the NSC, since the Committee is concerned about the delay caused by this
                    extra step.</p>
                <p>While McDonald had reported that Department historians would have full and
                    complete access to relevant records 26 years old or older, it was noted that
                    Department historians will soon be researching records of the Johnson
                    administration, through 1968. The question was raised whether CIA would restrict
                    access to 1967 and 1968 records. McDonald responded that although it was the new
                    legislation -- and not the CIA or the History Staff -- that specified the
                    26-year access limit, he personally expects CIA to do more than the law
                    requires, since DCI Gates clearly wants the Agency to be helpful and
                    forthcoming.</p>
                <p>Asked about CIA’s relations with foreign intelligence agencies, McDonald
                    explained that CIA cannot release foreign government information without
                    permission of that government. He pointed out that the British only officially
                    acknowledge the existence of their intelligence services after 30 years, and
                    that they (and most other countries) never declassify and release any
                    intelligence records at all. The CIA’s release of its OSS operational records,
                    and its commitment to systematic declassification review of all records over 30
                    years old, are in fact unprecedented anywhere else in the world.</p>
                <p>McDonald left copies of DCI Gates’ Oklahoma speech for the Committee.</p>
                <p>David Langbart of NARA then recommended that the Committee pay more attention to
                    records management procedures and current recordkeeping practices in the
                    Department. He described the Department of State electronic records system for
                    its Central File, created in mid-1973. He stated that the electronic system
                    provides fairly good coverage of records but some material does not go into the
                    system. Some files of top-level officials are preserved as paper files but are
                    not in the electronic index. He noted that this does not represent a real
                    change; it has been true for many years that some important records were not put
                    in the Central File but were maintained separately as Lot files.</p>
                <pb n="23" xml:id="pg_23" facs="0023"/>
                <p>Ken Rossman said the Department’s Records Management staff is looking at the
                    system more closely to examine such questions as whether the system is
                    overloaded with too much material lacking permanent interest and at the
                    usability of records on microfilm and microfiche. In response to a question from
                    Van Camp, he said he thought they needed to look at the electronic mail issue;
                    he was sure that retaining these records would be, and probably is already, a
                    problem.</p>
                <p>Kimball returned to the issue of the Presidential Libraries. He said the
                    Committee is concerned about Fawcett’s statement on Thursday that the Johnson
                    Library might not be as responsive to full processing of foreign policy files or
                    mandatory review requests during the 4-year period in which the Library would be
                    giving the necessary priority to access by Department historians for <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> research. Fawcett stated that the
                    conflict between mandatory review and the preparation of records for <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> research is real. The problem is one
                    of resources. The Presidential Libraries are adjusting their work load and
                    reallocating resources.</p>
                <p>Kimball did not believe the Committee would accept an “either/or” solution. There
                    were requirements for mandatory review and also statutory requirements for
                    release and publication of documents. Fawcett said these requirements are not
                    the only considerations in opening personal papers. Nelson said that McGeorge
                    Bundy’s papers, for example, fell under the requirements of the executive order.
                    Fawcett explained that the government controlled the information (as compared
                    with the copy of the document in a personal papers collection), and the
                    executive order applied to the originator of the information and tells
                    archivists at the Presidential Libraries to treat certain documents in these
                    personal papers collections as classified if they contain national security
                    information. The declassification of such documents was necessary in addition to
                    a review for donor restrictions.</p>
                <p>Kimball argued that the law required a review of Department of State records
                    after 30 years. Fawcett insisted it did not apply to copies of Department
                    records in personal papers collections in the Presidential Libraries. Kimball
                    asked why there was no compulsion to review documents for declassification after
                    30 years? Fawcett responded that the Presidential Libraries have an ongoing
                    mandatory review program, but he did not have sufficient resources to ensure
                    meeting the Department of State <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    schedule while maintaining complete processing of foreign policy files and the
                    mandatory review program in those libraries preparing for or assisting in <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> research.</p>
                <pb n="24" xml:id="pg_24" facs="0024"/>
                <p>Nelson pointed out that publication of <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> will help the libraries with mandatory review by making more
                    records available to everyone. In response to questions as to whether the
                    Presidential Libraries could combine preparation of files for Department of
                    State historians with related mandatory review requests, Fawcett said that was
                    not feasible. Smith briefly explained what was involved in the processing of
                    files for researchers and noted that the Presidential Libraries had undertaken
                    partial processing for Department historians to provide accelerated special
                    access for <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> research.</p>
                <p>Herring noted that there was a trade-off between Department of State access and
                    regular processing. Nelson stated that the Committee could not be in the
                    position of approving that trade-off. The statute has been passed; NARA has to
                    carry out its part. Fawcett stated that the Johnson Library was better prepared
                    than the Kennedy Library for Department researchers in that more processing has
                    been done. Kimball stated that the Committee would probably express its
                    unhappiness with the situation.</p>
                <p>Fawcett stressed that the problem is one of resources. NARA has been giving
                    priority to the building of Archives II and does not have all the money it needs
                    to cover the move. It would be appropriate for the Department of State to cover
                    some of the libraries’ cost of preparing records for Department research. In
                    this regard the Department has been exploring with the Presidential Libraries a
                    reimbursable agreement for $14,000 to cover the cost of an archives technician
                    at the Johnson Library until the end of the fiscal year. He pointed out that the
                    Library needs to hire people in advance because of the time necessary to obtain
                    security clearances for new staff.</p>
                <p>The Committee recessed at noon for luncheon.</p>
                <pb n="25" xml:id="pg_25" facs="0025"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="luncheon-meeting-with-under-secretary-rogers_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Luncheon Meeting with Under Secretary Rogers</hi></head>
                <p rend="center"><hi rend="underline">March 27, 12:00-1:45</hi></p>
                <p>Under Secretary of State for Management John F. W. Rogers greeted the Committee
                    on behalf of the Secretary and assured the Committee of his own and the
                    Department’s commitment to implementing the October 28, 1991 statute. He
                    stressed that he considered the statute to be of great importance. He thanked
                    the Committee members for agreeing to serve, noting that this activity took time
                    away from their own endeavors. Mr. Rogers indicated that he was not with the
                    Department when the legislation was under consideration, which he felt would be
                    an advantage in that implementing the legislation posed no difficulties of
                    consistency or inconsistency. He stated that everyone under his direction would
                    be required to do everthing necessary to implement the new statute.</p>
                <p>Chairman Kimball expressed the Committee’s appreciation for Under Secretary
                    Rogers’ support. The Committee had been very pleased with the support of Rogers’
                    predecessor, Ivan Selin, and the improved responsiveness of the Department to
                    the Committee’s concerns during the past year. He believed that the legislation
                    offered an opportunity to improve the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series and looked forward to working with the Department in
                    the implementation of the statute.</p>
                <p>During the ensuing luncheon, Under Secretary Rogers and Committee members engaged
                    in discussion ranging from budget, resource, and organizational issues attendant
                    to implementation of the legislation, to the impact of recent changes in the
                    former Soviet Union on the historical record.</p>
                <pb n="26" xml:id="pg_26" facs="0026"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--march-27--2-00-2-30_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, March 27, 2:00-2;30</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball inquired if the Committee wished to discuss the issue of publication of
                    supplemental documentation to <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, Iran,
                    1951-1954. Herring saw little point in preparing a supplement on Iran, as the
                    legislation established a process to prevent such a situation in the future.
                    Rosenberg indicated that the CIA should be urged to identify as many of the
                    documents on Iran not published in the volume and work out some way of having
                    them released. Kimball said that Department historians should assess these
                    materials and deal with the manner in which they should be released. Slany
                    suggested that the Committee recommend that the matter be resolved quickly.</p>
                <p>The question arose of delaying the publication of a volume, such as on Indonesia,
                    in order to get more documents released by the CIA. LaFantasie said there was a
                    trade-off; delay would affect the production schedule. The documents would have
                    to be worth such a trade-off. Glad expressed concern that the production
                    schedule for the volumes not compromise comprehensiveness. She referred to the
                    proposed size limitation of 800 pages for each Johnson volume. Slany indicated
                    that size affects the processing of volumes. Selection standards must be
                    maintained, although the fewer documents selected, the faster the processing of
                    the volumes would be. LaFantasie said that the Office of the Historian would
                    have to be flexible on page counts.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg again raised the issue of the plan for publishing the foreign policy
                    record of the Johnson administration. It would not be prudent to continue to
                    shrink the published record to meet time constraints even while the universe of
                    documentation expands. It might be necessary to consider supplements to the
                    planned Johnson volumes. Perkins, however, stated that the planned Johnson
                    publications would meet the purpose of the series; he would not want to see the
                    schedule sacrificed in order to publish a few more volumes or pages of
                    documents.</p>
                <p>Van Camp urged that the Committee focus on the Department’s plan at the next
                    meeting. Picker also urged that the next meeting include a discussion of the
                    issue of the ultimate disposition and use of the larger foreign policy record.
                    Kimball said these would be major agenda items at the next meeting. He asked the
                    Historian to circulate current plans and previous reports to Committee members
                    in advance of that meeting.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned and reconvened in executive session at 2:30.</p>
                <pb n="27" xml:id="pg_27" facs="0027"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="executive-session--march-27--2-30-3-30_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Executive Session, March 27, 2:30-3:30</hi></head>
                <p>The Committee reviewed and discussed the items that it wished to take under
                    consideration, to include on the next meeting’s agenda, and/or to present in a
                    report to the Department on the results of this meeting.</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>A. <hi rend="underline">Establishment of Subcommittees</hi></p>
                        <list>
                            <item>
                                <p>1. Prof. Herring, Prof. Glad, and Prof. Taylor will review
                                    1958-1960 Vol. XVII, Japan with particular attention to the DOS
                                    declassification review decisions.</p></item>
                            <item>
                                <p>2. Prof. Kimball and Prof. Perkins will review 1955-1957, Vol.
                                    XXIII, Part 2, Korea and the declassification review
                                    thereof.</p></item>
                            <item>
                                <p>3. Ms. Van Camp and Prof. Rosenberg will review the Department
                                    declassification review guidelines.</p></item>
                            <item>
                                <p>4. Prof. Nelson and Prof. Picker will review the interagency
                                    agreements for access by department historians.</p></item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>B. <hi rend="underline">The Van Camp Report</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee reviewed Ms. Van Camp’s summary of the Committee’s views on
                            the principles and procedures to be followed in future meetings. It was
                            to be taken up again at the next meeting.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>C. <hi rend="underline">Production Progress Report</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee was pleased that there appeared full agreement on the
                            Production Schedule for the accelerated series. The Committee would like
                            to see a progress report from the Department at the next meeting on how
                            well the schedule is being implemented.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>D. <hi rend="underline">Dissemination of the Foreign Relations Production
                                Schedule</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee reiterated its desire that the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                                Relations</hi> Production Schedule (dated March 25, 1992) now be
                            disseminated (published) by the appropriate organs of the constitutent
                            societies and that updates be published annually thereafter.</p></item>
                    <pb n="28" xml:id="pg_28" facs="0028"/>
                    <item>
                        <p>E. <hi rend="underline">Streamline Historians’ Access to Agency
                                Records</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee was going to recommend that the agreements that the
                            Department intended to conclude with other agencies regarding access by
                            Department historians include some sort of “blanket” clearance that
                            allowed receipt of copies of documents without an extra step for
                            preliminary agency screening and review.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>F. <hi rend="underline">The Size and Scope of the Johnson Administration
                                Subseries</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee reiterated its concern about the planned size and scope of
                            the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series documenting the
                            Johnson years. The ambitious time schedule and the “800-page model” of
                            selectivity will be put at the head of the agenda for the next
                            meeting.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>G. <hi rend="underline">Presidential Library Reimbursement</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee expressed concern about the real or apparent conflict
                            between Presidential Library priority service of Department historians
                            and the research needs of private historians. Because of the special
                            nature of the Presidential papers, this aspect of the access issue was a
                            State Department problem. The Committee wished to recommend to the
                            Department that it consider allocating resources to mitigate the
                            problem.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>H. <hi rend="underline">Opening of the Foreign Affairs Record</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee wished to encourage the early opening of the foreign
                            affairs records of the various agencies. A report from the CIA on its
                            priorities for such opening would be looked forward to. The Committee
                            would like to recommend that CIA records on covert actions in Guatemala
                            in 1954 and Iran in 1953 be assigned a very high priority and that a
                            report be made to the Committee at its May meeting.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>I. <hi rend="underline">Identifying Volumes for Committee Review</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee had no way on its own to determine which volumes needed its
                            review. It would be left to the Historian and his staff to identify
                            which volumes were in trouble and needed advice of the Committee.</p><pb
                            n="29" xml:id="pg_29" facs="0029"/></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>J. <hi rend="underline">Treaties and Executive Agreements</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee, and particularly Prof. Picker, were concerned about the
                            inclusion in the printed record of secret treaties and agreements. The
                            Historian agreed to make a report on these records and their inclusion
                            in the series.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>K. <hi rend="underline">Records Management Report</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee looked forward to Mr. Rossman’s report on Department
                            records management procedures.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>L. <hi rend="underline">Committee Communications</hi></p>
                        <p>The Commmittee would like to facilitate communication with the Executive
                            Secretary by E-Mail and fax. It urged that these links would greatly
                            facilitate the work of the Committee.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>M. <hi rend="underline">Open Committee Meetings</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee favored as much openness to the public of their meetings as
                            possible. It urged that the first portion of the next (May) meeting be
                            open to the public. It appreciated the reports received at this meeting
                            from various government officers, but felt that far fewer briefings
                            would be necessary at the next meeting.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>N. <hi rend="underline">Next Meetings</hi></p>
                        <p>The Committee felt that a May meeting would be urgently required. It
                            asked the Executive Secretary to poll members and set the most
                            convenient date. A possible August meeting was discussed, but no
                            decisions was reached. The Department was asked to determine what the
                            legal requirements for meetings were under the October 28, 1991
                            statute.</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="30" xml:id="pg_30" facs="0030"/>
                <p>The Committee adjourned at 3:30 p.m.</p>
                <table cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell>Drafted: PA/HO:</cell>
                        <cell>DHHerschler/RMBaker</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>PC: ACMIN392</cell>
                        <cell>4/15/92 663-1145</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Clearances:</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <p>PA/HO:WZSlany</p>
                            <p>PA/HO: GWLaFantasie</p>
                            <p>PA: GAKennedy</p>
                            <p>DS/IM/FPC/HDR : JHChaddic</p>
                            <p>DS/IM/OIS/RM : KRossman</p>
                            <p>CIA : JKMcDonald</p>
                            <p>NARA/NL : NKSmith</p>
                            <p>NARA/NIR : GCChalou</p>
                            <p>NARA/NIR : DALangbart</p></cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
