<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1992-05-14">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, May
                    1992</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1992</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1992-05-14">May 14, 1992</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <body>
            <pb n="1" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section" xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation_1">
                <head><hi rend="bold">ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTATION May
                        14-15, 1992</hi></head>
                <p><hi rend="underline"><hi rend="bold">Committee members</hi></hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Warren Kimball, Chairman</item>
                    <item>Betty Glad</item>
                    <item>George Herring</item>
                    <item>Anna Nelson</item>
                    <item>Bradford Perkins</item>
                    <item>Jane Picker</item>
                    <item>Emily Rosenberg</item>
                    <item>Arnold Taylor</item>
                    <item>Ann Van Camp</item>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Exec. Secretary</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline"><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>G. Alfred Kennedy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Susan
                        Povenmire</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline"><hi rend="bold">Office of the Historian</hi></hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William Z. Slany</item>
                    <item>Glenn W. LaFantasie</item>
                    <item>Rita M. Baker</item>
                    <item>Vicki E. Futscher</item>
                    <item>Evans Gerakas</item>
                    <item>David H. Herschler</item>
                    <item>Nina Howland</item>
                    <item>David W. Mabon</item>
                    <item>Edward C. Keefer</item>
                    <item>James E. Miller</item>
                    <item>Nina J. Noring</item>
                    <item>David S. Patterson</item>
                    <item>Charles S. Sampson</item>
                    <item>William F. Sanford</item>
                    <item>Jeffrey A. Soukup</item>
                    <item>Shirley Taylor</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline"><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Joe Chaddic, Chief, Historical Documents Review Division</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline"><hi rend="bold">Other</hi></hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>J. Kenneth McDonald, Central Intelligence Agency</item>
                    <item>Page Putnam Miller</item>
                </list>
                <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0002"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--may-14--9-15-10-45_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, May 14, 9:15-10:45</hi></head>
                <p>Chairman Warren Kimball convened the meeting of the Advisory Committee on
                    Historical Diplomatic Documentation at 9:15 a.m. The first item considered was
                    adoption of the minutes of the last session. William Z. SIany, Executive
                    Secretary of the Committee and Historian of the Department, asked if the minutes
                    were adequate or perhaps more than adequate; he discussed options -- tape
                    recording or stenography -- which were not feasible because of cost. The
                    drafting, collating, and final editing of the minutes required at least 2 weeks
                    of staff time. The Committee maintained that they preferred meeting minutes of
                    the same complexity and depth and in the same format as previously.</p>
                <p>Anna Nelson wished a clarification of the minutes covering John Fawcett’s
                    presentation regarding mandatory review at the Presidential Libraries. David
                    Herschler told her that the minutes had been corrected and clarified by both
                    John Fawcett and Nancy Smith. Nelson, however, wanted the minutes corrected to
                    reflect the fact that Fawcett had actually said that the average wait for
                    mandatory review was 2 years. George Herring agreed.</p>
                <p>With that clarification, the minutes were adopted unanimously.</p>
                <p>Betty Glad asked about the public availability of the minutes. Slany noted that
                    they are unclassified and probably should be distributed to historical
                    societies. Ann Van Camp suggested that they be housed at the National Archives;
                    Kimball suggested the Madison Reading Room at the Library of Congress. A notice
                    could be sent to the societies that the minutes are available there. Page Miller
                    noted that the records of the American Historical Association were at the
                    Library of Congress. Kimball closed the discussion by indicating that he wants
                    the minutes made available to researchers and historians.</p>
                <p>Kimball next turned to adoption of the agenda and asked the Committee if anything
                    should be added. Jane Picker asked if there would be time to discuss the access
                    agreements and publication of the <hi rend="underline">Digest of U.S. Practice
                        in International Law</hi>. Slany indicated that he would discuss the access
                    agreements in his report. Kimball remembered that the Committee was supposed to
                    receive two written reports, one on the <hi rend="underline">Digest</hi> and one
                    on records management practices in the Department. Van Camp noted that the
                    report was to cover only the broadest definition of records management: general
                    Department problems and guidelines. Herschler said that Ken Rossman, the
                    Department’s records manager, was overseas and had not yet provided such a
                    report.</p>
                <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0003"/>
                <p>Nelson asked Kimball if he routinely submits a short report to Assistant
                    Secretary of State Margaret Tutwiler. She would like to include on the agenda a
                    small block of time to discuss what kind of action items the Committee would
                    like its Chairman to report to Tutwiler. The Committee and Kimball agreed.</p>
                <p>Kimball stressed that he would like to see on future agenda time reserved to hear
                    from <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> compilers who are having or who
                    foresee having problems with their volumes. Glenn W. LaFantasie, General Editor
                    of the series, asked Kimball for a clarification. Kimball indicated that he was
                    only interested in issues within the jurisdiction of the Committee: research,
                    declassification, or other-agency access. He assured him that he did not want to
                    set up a “back channel” for complaints or a bureaucratic appeal procedure to
                    bypass the General Editor.</p>
                <p>Emily Rosenberg asked about time to discuss issues relating to the Rosenberg/Van
                    Camp subcommittee on declassification guidelines, which had not convened or
                    prepared a report. Kimball said that these issues could be included in
                    discussion of the Department’s report to Congress on opening records. The report
                    of the Nelson/Picker subcommittee on access agreements, scheduled for later in
                    the morning, could be switched to Friday morning.</p>
                <p>The agenda was then adopted as amended.</p>
                <p>Kimball called on Slany to make his report on the implementation of the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> statute. He reported considerable
                    progress on the two statutory requirements of the law: 1) written agreements to
                    establish procedures for access to the foreign affairs records of other
                    agencies, and 2) established procedures within the Department of State to meet
                    the declassification deadlines. Under Secretary Rogers has expressed his concern
                    and commitment that the Department meet the deadlines and is taking steps to
                    ensure that. Slany noted that the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>
                    Production Schedule, which aims at achieving the 30-year line within 5 years, is
                    the document that all in the Department have agreed to and are working
                    from.*</p>
                <p>* HDR has indicated that it does not agree to, but is working from, the PA/HO <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> Production Schedule.</p>
                <p>Regarding the recommendations that the Committee made pursuant to its last
                    meeting, Slany reported:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) the Department of State and the National Archives have concluded an
                            agreement to provide a subvention to NARA for processing at the Johnson
                            Library. On May 18, an additional archives technician will be detailed
                            to the LBJ Library to assist in processing material for Department of
                            State historians. Kimball noted in an <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4"
                                facs="0004"/> aside that the $14,000 came from the budget of the
                            Advisory Committee and Nelson pointed out that the person who was
                            detailed to the Johnson Library camefrom the declassification staff at
                            the National Archives. Kimball ascertained, however, that although the
                            person was detailed to Texas, the position would remain at NARA and
                            would be filled.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) The National Security Council and the Central Intelligence Agency have
                            agreed to expedite the transfer of copies of their records in the
                            Presidential Libraries to the Historical Office. They will no longer
                            require prescreening of documents. All agreed that this was a major
                            breakthrough in expediting compiling <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                                Relations</hi> volumes.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3) The CIA Historian has agreed that access to 1953 Iran and 1954
                            Guatemala documents is a high priority research project. The Director of
                            Central Intelligence is, however, currently preoccupied with responding
                            to legislative requests relating to the JFK assassination. The CIA
                            acknowledges that the research will take place during the
                        summer.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Kimball noted that this third point was important and must be followed up. He
                    indicated it would head a list of Committee concerns. Kimball also expressed the
                    pleasure of the Committee at the positive and quick response to its specific
                    recommendations and requests.</p>
                <p>Slany continued with his report on the status of the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series. The Office aimed at completing publication of the
                    Eisenhower administration volumes, which had been compiled in the 1970s and
                    1980s, by the end of 1993. Office historians would be completing research on the
                    Kennedy administration this year and would begin research on Johnson this
                    summer. All agencies have now agreed to the Production Chart (aka the Perkins
                    Chart) and are using it as a planning document. The Office has published 4
                    volumes so far this year and plans to publish a total of 13 this calendar year,
                    and about 12 volumes next year.</p>
                <p>Assistant Secretary Tutwiler has expressed her concern that the target dates in
                    the Production Chart be adhered to. She has intervened with Assistant Secretary
                    of State for Diplomatic Security Krys to ensure that the schedule is in place
                    and that volumes will be returned from the National Security Council this
                    spring. Kimball also noted that Tutwiler’s memorandum to all the Assistant
                    Secretaries informing them of their bureaus obligations and responsibilities
                    under the legislation has fulfilled a request made by the previous Advisory
                    Committee.</p>
                <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0005"/>
                <p>Bradford Perkins pointed out time lags in declassification, especially for
                    volumes on Asia. Slany replied that these volumes were compiled in the 1980s and
                    suffered significant delays in declassification because there was neither a
                    sense of urgency nor a coordinated effort to complete declassification. Perkins
                    wanted to know if it indicated an unwillingness of any one bureau to declassify
                    documents. Mabon clarified that declassification of these Asia volumes was held
                    up in other agencies -- in the Department of Defense for the Korea volume, in
                    the CIA for the Indonesia volume.</p>
                <p>Nelson voiced her concern that documents that were not easily declassifiable
                    would be omitted in order to meet deadlines and urged that the Department not
                    sacrifice the quality of the series for timeliness. Kimball agreed that it was a
                    major problem to balance scholarly and editorial integrity with the legislative
                    deadlines. Rosenberg suggested that this issue could be part of the reports by
                        <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> compilers on problems they are
                    encountering. Compilers should know early in the process what kind of trade-offs
                    will be necessary for their volumes.</p>
                <p>Kimball noted that this problem of balancing will be getting bigger, not smaller,
                    and that the Committee should consider defining a precedent for all volumes.</p>
                <p>Arnold Taylor asked Slany about the use of graduate student interns in the Office
                    of the Historian. Slany informed the Committee that the Office is scheduled to
                    have four interns this summer and could use that many all year. The difficulty
                    lies in recruitment and security clearance. Deputy Assistant Secretary of State
                    Kennedy noted that the universities would have to recruit suitable candidates
                    during the first quarter of the academic year and the student would have to make
                    a commitment so the Department of State could begin the personnel actions --
                    including security clearances -- by January 1.</p>
                <p>Kimball next raised the issue of application of the 120-day legislative deadline
                    for declassification review to volumes compiled before the statute. Does the
                    legislation apply to volumes already in the declassification pipeline? Slany
                    noted that he and Kennedy maintained an ongoing discussion on this very issue.
                    He explained that even if the agencies dramatically speeded up their review, the
                    Office still could handle only about 15 cleared volumes a year. Nevertheless he
                    agreed that the remaining Eisenhower volumes still in the clearance pipeline
                    should have been cleared by now.</p>
                <p>Kimball wondered whether the Committee should become involved in expediting the
                    declassification of these volumes. He stated that at the very least the
                    Committee could register its serious concern over the declassification delay. He
                    added <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6" facs="0006"/> that he anticipated that the other
                    agencies responsible for clearing portions of <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> volumes would not be anxious to go before Congress to explain
                    why they were not in compliance with the legislation.</p>
                <p>Slany indicated that HO has worked with Joe Chaddic and the Department’s
                    declassification staff to negotiate with other agencies to reach an agreement
                    that the legislation applies to these volumes as well as to those entering the
                    declassification process since enactment of the legislation. Both Kennedy and
                    Slany preferred that the Committee refrain from taking action on this subject
                    and allow the Department to work out a solution to this serious problem.</p>
                <p>Kennedy informed the Committee that both Rogers and Tutwiler are serious about
                    implementing the legislation; neither wants to report to Congress that the
                    Department of State has not complied. Rogers has said that he will do all that
                    he can within his scope of responsibility and he is currently working on a plan,
                    which will be thoroughly vetted within the Department, to meet the legislative
                    requirements. Kennedy vowed that the Bureau of Public Affairs will do all it can
                    to make sure that the volumes will be complete and accurate and will meet all
                    scholarly standards. He has instituted an “early warning system” to detect
                    problems at an early stage so they can be resolved. If the Committee can help in
                    any way, he will certainly ask.</p>
                <p>Turning to the planning for the Johnson administration volumes, Slany reminded
                    the Committee that he had often in the past asked for their advice. The
                    Department plans to meet the requirements of the statute to publish a complete
                    and accurate record but must also operate within the limitations and constraints
                    of the real world:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>the amount of documents that can be accessed and gathered from the
                            Johnson Library (without disabling the Library);</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>the limited resources of other agencies in both facilitating access and
                            declassifying documents;</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>the limited resources of the Historical Office.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>The Bureau of Public Affairs has consistently provided enough money for
                    publication of the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes; it has
                    in fact become the largest item in PA’s budget. But all of the Federal
                    government is trying to curb spending and reduce the deficit. Secretary of State
                    Baker in April requested all bureaus to make budget cuts in order to provide the
                    resources for establishing new Embassies in the former Soviet republics.
                    Tutwiler has assured him that HO’s budget will not be reduced, <pb n="7"
                        xml:id="pg_7" facs="0007"/> but also charged him with completing all those
                    volumes for which funds have been earmarked. Nor were there limits on travel and
                    research for Department historians. Slany stated his belief that additional
                    staff was not the solution. Processing and handling procedures and requirements
                    at the Presidential Libraries and other agencies limit the number of State
                    Department researchers that can be accommodated.</p>
                <p>He again asked for the Committee’s advice and support in the selectivity the
                    Office must exercise in compiling the Johnson administration volumes given the
                    number of agencies and the volume of records. The proposed volumes would have to
                    be considered case-by-case. Kimball agreed that this is a fundamental issue
                    before the Committee and would be discussed throughout the rest of the 2-day
                    sessions.</p>
                <p>Van Camp indicated that she would like to defer her report on declassification
                    guidelines until the next meeting in view of the fact that the Department is
                    making changes to the guidelines. Rosenberg said she would like to discuss these
                    changes during this meeting.</p>
                <p>On the issues of the State Department Report to Congress on Opening Records at 30
                    Years, Slany deferred to Chaddic, who noted that the report was included in the
                    packet circulated to the Committee. He stated that he thought the report spoke
                    for itself, and that he as drafting officer had tried to provide what was
                    required. He only wished that he could have brought the report to the
                    Committee’s attention sooner, but the bureaucratic procedures of preparing and
                    transmitting the document to Congress had taken longer than anticipated. He said
                    that next time his office would begin the process sooner. Chaddic then invited
                    the Committee’s comments on the report.</p>
                <p>Nelson requested verification that the completed systematic declassification
                    review of the 1955-1959 records only covers central decimal files and not the
                    Department’s lot files. The report was also unclear on whether the legislation
                    covers records from the 1930s and 1940s at NARA that are still unreviewed. Page
                    Miller informed the Committee that NARA has these records, including
                    declassification guidelines, but does not have the resources to review them
                    under systematic review and only reviews these documents when they are requested
                    by a researcher. Kimball pointed out that the system of reviewing older files
                    only when they were specifically requested was probably the best approach since
                    he personally was not in favor of diverting resources away from declassification
                    of files currently in the 30 year window.</p>
                <p>Chaddic indicated that State and NARA have agreed that the lot and decimal files
                    for the 1960-1963 record block will be reviewed together. Nelson welcomed this
                    development but expressed doubt that the declassifiers would be able to handle
                    this much larger volume of records and meet their deadlines. <pb n="8"
                        xml:id="pg_8" facs="0008"/> She also insisted that the minutes should be
                    clear that only the review of the central files had been completed through 1959.
                    Rosenberg added that the Committee faced a potential public relations problem
                    with its academic constituencies, which tended to believe that under the new
                    legislation everything would be open after 30 years. She advised that the
                    Committee inform the historical associations that this in fact would not be the
                    case. Nelson pointed out the necessity for NARA to request additional resources
                    to implement the legislation.</p>
                <p>In connection with the general discussion about the incomplete declassification
                    of older records, Perkins mentioned his difficulty in seeing INR files when he
                    had last been at the National Archives. Slany stated that in the case of INR as
                    well as other files a related problem was that often files were segregated, held
                    separately and not turned over to NARA, or were destroyed in the Department
                    during the screening process. He urged the Committee to make recommendations
                    about identifying and preserving bodies of files and suggested that the
                    Committee consider recommending preparation of a records management report on
                    INR files that would emphasize preservation.</p>
                <p>Before the break, Kimball introduced some general thoughts that he hoped
                    Committee members would consider before the meeting was reconvened. He
                    personally expressed annoyance that President Bush’s signing statement
                    qualifying the legislation was repeated frequently throughout the report to
                    Congress. He also presented for the Committee’s consideration the desirability
                    of HDR instituting a flow chart similar to the one created by HO identifying
                    target dates for the aggregate declassification of files sent to the National
                    Archives. Finally, he directed the Committee’s attention to the questionable
                    legality of the designation in the Department’s report to Congress of the <hi
                        rend="underline">youngest</hi> records in each record block as the ones
                    determining the age of all the documents in the file rather than the <hi
                        rend="underline">oldest</hi> records.</p>
                <p>At approximately 10:45 a.m., the Committee recessed for a break.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--may-14--11-00-12-05_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, May 14, 11:00-12:05</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball asked if the Department’s report on opening 30-year-old records had gone
                    to Congress, and was assured by Slany that it had.</p>
                <p>Noting the presence of Ken McDonald, Chief of the CIA History Staff, Kimball
                    asked members of the subcommittee on interagency agreements if they wished to
                    pursue any issues with <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0009"/> McDonald. Nelson
                    suggested that the subcommittee report later on all concerns at a general level,
                    and privately direct any specific questions about the CIA agreement to McDonald.
                    Perkins asked McDonald about the CIA review of documents on Iran and Guatemala.
                    McDonald explained that in testimony this week DCI Gates has promised Congress
                    that CIA will give first priority to declassification review of some 330,000
                    pages of Kennedy assassination records. Since the new group that is reviewing
                    historical records is not yet fully staffed, and review of the Kennedy papers
                    could take from six to 18 months, it will be some time before the new group can
                    take on such projects as Iran and Guatemala.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if the CIA could provide an outline of its work plan. McDonald
                    indicated that while he was not in a position to do that now, he would hope that
                    reviewers could be assigned to undertake projects of special interest to the
                    Department of State once the new Historical Review Group has the Kennedy papers
                    well in hand. The CIA History Staff’s work in support of State historians
                    compiling <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes will, of course,
                    move forward now that CIA and State have concluded their Memorandum of
                    Understanding on procedures.</p>
                <p>Referring to his final comments before the break, Kimball noted that he was
                    troubled by frequent references in the Department’s report to Congress on
                    opening 30-year-old records and the attached fiscal report to the President’s
                    signing statement at the time of enactment of the legislation. He was also
                    troubled by the phrases “traditional” procedures and “spirit” of the mandate,
                    which he said could be interpreted as a means of non-compliance with the
                    legislation.</p>
                <p>Chaddic responded that these phrases were not meant to avoid the law and he did
                    not think the President’s signing statement would have much impact on the
                    declassification process. The phrases in question were meant to make the case
                    for additional funding that would better enable DS to comply with the
                    legislation.</p>
                <p>Kimball and Glad suggested that the funding concerns, described in part by
                    Chaddic, be articulated to Congress.</p>
                <p>Kimball reiterated his view that the law indicates that the oldest document
                    determines when a block reaches 30 years, not the most recent. He indicated that
                    the Department’s interpretation was not in compliance with the law, but asserted
                    that the Committee understands the “realities” with regard to meeting the
                    legislative deadlines. Although it may take time to reach, the Department should
                    establish a 30-year line for the oldest records in the block as its goal. He
                    then urged HDR to provide rough target dates for its declassification
                    program.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked Chaddic if he was comfortable with the Committee’s advice.</p>
                <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0010"/>
                <p>Chaddic welcomed the Committee’s advice. He then described his staff’s efforts to
                    work out international agreements and cooperation on declassification.</p>
                <p>Herring inquired about the likelihood of DS accelerating declassification in
                    support of the legislation.</p>
                <p>Chaddic assured the Committee of HDR’s good intentions in this regard, and
                    described several HDR initiatives to accomplish this acceleration.</p>
                <p>Herring stated that declassification guidelines were outdated because of the
                    changed international climate since they were written (i.e., cold war tensions).
                    He wondered if a new approach should be sought.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg suggested Herring’s inquiry would best be taken up by her subcommittee,
                    which would be looking into the Department’s declassification guidelines and
                    would have a report for the next meeting.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked that declassification guidelines be made available to the Committee
                    during its review of <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. The
                    Committee and Chaddic supported this request.</p>
                <p>Kimball and Page Miller asked Chaddic if the $3 million said to be devoted to 20
                    new declassifier positions for review of the 1960-1963 records was firm. Chaddic
                    indicated that it was.</p>
                <p>The Committee then turned to consideration of the plan for the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes covering the Johnson
                    administration.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie provided an overview of the plan for the LBJ volumes. The scope and
                    conception of the Johnson volumes, he said, would have to be adjusted to fit the
                    mandate of the law by taking several exigencies into account. He pointed out
                    that the conception of the LBJ volumes that he was presenting to the Committee
                    had been developed as a result of a careful and intricate assessment of the
                    realities that we must face -- the practical limitations that control how much
                    we can do and how much we cannot, including the number of pages, contents, and
                    research and production schedules. The <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series, he said, was now facing serious constraints and
                    realities that cannot be ignored, such as time factors, personnel numbers, the
                    dynamics of the declassification process, and funding limitations. The
                    conception of the LBJ subseries is, for all intents and purposes, being dictated
                    by the practical realities we are facing.</p>
                <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0011"/>
                <p>Each of these practical aspects has been carefully weighed in designing the plan
                    for the LBJ volumes, he said. Actually, he pointed out, several of these ideas
                    had been presented earlier to the former Advisory Committee in the early 1980s,
                    1984, and 1988. The scope of the LBJ subseries is not arbitrary. Instead the
                    conception comes from constraints we are facing, the standards of content and
                    deadlines set by the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> statute, and
                    the conventional methods of selectivity and annotation that have been widely
                    adopted in the field of documentary editing.</p>
                <p>According to present plans, the LBJ subseries will consist of anywhere from 33 to
                    36 volumes. He explained that consultation with division chiefs and compilers
                    since the last Advisory Committee meeting resulted in a proposed increase of 3
                    volumes over the number originally put forth in previous plans. Each volume, he
                    said, would consist of approximately 800 pages and would cover the five-year
                    period from 1964 to 1968 (except for the Vietnam volumes and some “crisis”
                    volumes). He acknowledged that the explosion of documentation would make the
                    selection of documents for each volume more difficult, creating a formidable
                    intellectual challenge that the compilers would have to confront and deal with,
                    but he pointed out that it should be possible to create volumes that were highly
                    selective but that still told the major stories needing to be covered and could
                    point the user to additional sources not printed.</p>
                <p>He referred to the tables of contents that had been submitted earlier to members
                    of the committee and pointed out that these contents were for 36 volumes rather
                    than 33. He said that several factors would have to be considered before the
                    number of volumes was increased, including the availability of staff within
                    divisions to complete the extra volumes, the availability of funding to pay for
                    the production costs, the means by which the available staff would accomplish
                    work on the extra volumes while still meeting the mandated deadlines of the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> statute, and the potential impact
                    additional volumes would have on the declassification process in State and in
                    the other agencies.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie said that the reduction of the volumes to approximately 800 pages
                    would be accomplished by rigorous selection of materials during the research and
                    compiling phases but also by a reduction of annotation. He pointed out that one
                    common practice among modern documentary editions is called “clustering,”
                    whereby one document is selected for publication as representative of similar
                    documents and then annotation is appended to the printed document to reveal the
                    location and nature of the similar documents that could not be included for
                    publication. He also said that some detail in footnotes could be eliminated.</p>
                <pb n="12" xml:id="pg_12" facs="0012"/>
                <p>He spoke about the elimination of microfiche supplements as part of the new
                    approach to the LBJ subseries and said that the elimination was necessary to
                    meet the legislative timeframe with the limitations of existing resources for
                    compiling, declassifying, and publishing the volumes. In some respects, he said,
                    each fiche supplement equals a single volume of <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi>, insofar as each fiche requires time and effort to research,
                    arrange, compile, declassify, and produce.</p>
                <p>Following LaFantasie’s summary presentation, the Committee recessed for lunch at
                    12:05.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--may-14--1-30-3-30_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, May 14, 1:30-3:30</hi></head>
                <p>The Committee reconvened at 1:30 p.m. Discussion centered on a subcommittee
                    review of <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1955-1957, vol. XXIII,
                    Part 2, Korea. Chaddic provided each member of the Committee with copies of the
                    Department declassification guidelines for Korea 1955-1957 and Japan 1958-1960
                    (scheduled to be discussed Friday morning). Kimball noted that Perkins, the
                    other member of this subcommittee, could not come early to review the volume, so
                    Kimball did it the previous day. He indicated that there were inconsistencies in
                    the clearance process which may have occurred because a clearance folder was
                    lost and not found in the course of submitting, reviewing, and resubmitting the
                    documents.</p>
                <quote rend="blockquote">
                    <p>[Pages 13-17 consist of a classified discussion of <hi rend="underline"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi>, 1955-1957, Vol. XXIII, Part 2, Korea. Copies of
                        the classified minutes are available in PA/HO.]</p></quote>
                <pb n="18" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0013"/>
                <p>The Committee then returned to a discussion of the draft tables of contents to
                    the volumes on the Johnson administration. Glad asked to what degree the Vietnam
                    volumes duplicated the Pentagon Papers, if they were useful, and what will be
                    new in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. Mabon responded
                    that the Pentagon Papers ceased in mid-1967, and did not contain much 1967
                    material. Herring agreed that there was not much for 1967 in certain areas, and
                    it was mostly a Defense Department study that did not take into account other
                    agency documentation, including State documents. Nelson added that the NSC did
                    not cooperate in the Pentagon project. Ted Keefer said that if the document was
                    crucial, it was printed in <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, and the
                    others were only cited. LaFantasie remarked that there is much more to the
                    Vietnam volumes than the Pentagon Papers.</p>
                <p>Perkins wondered whether there was perhaps too much coverage of Vietnam. He
                    thought there was a lot of repetition in the 1964 volume, for example, and cited
                    the many Khanh-Lodge memcons. Perhaps the historians had been “seduced” into
                    believing that Vietnam was so important. LaFantasie responded that it was not
                    seduction, he hoped, but the result of earlier decisions to continue the major
                    story lines. Vietnam was not a model for the rest of the 1964-1968 volumes.
                    Specimen documents were printed, and related ones were cited in annotation.
                    Keefer rejoined, “I disagree 100 percent” with Perkins’ point on the Lodge-Khanh
                    memcons, and he explained that there were many more that were not printed.
                    Charles Sampson added that the Vietnam volumes were a model for research
                    planning of the other 1964-1968 because many other repositories were first
                    searched for the Vietnam volumes. LaFantasie agreed and thought that the
                    prefaces were a stepping off point (if not a model) for the others. He
                    circulated the preface to the 1964 volume. Nelson said that she does not have
                    the Vietnam volumes; the new members have only received the most recent ones.
                    Slany said that the minutes should indicate that the other volumes should be
                    sent to the new members.</p>
                <p>Glad commended the sources consulted for the Vietnam volumes. Nelson and Herring
                    agreed that a lot of documentary sources are no longer in State Department
                    files. LaFantasie intimated that he was conceiving of an essay on sources for
                    future volumes, and he circulated a review of the 1958-1960 Cuba volume in the
                        <hi rend="underline">Pacific Historical Review</hi> on the universe of
                    sources, among other things. Rosenberg raised the question of where to stop on
                    including secondary sources in prefaces. LaFantasie said that the emphasis of
                    essays on sources would focus only on primary sources. Herring and Nelson
                    disagreed with the need for historiographical essays, which were very difficult
                    to write. LaFantasie said the essay would not just list the sources but describe
                    them substantively.</p>
                <pb n="19" xml:id="pg_19" facs="0014"/>
                <p>Kimball asked what researchers needed from the prefaces to assist their work.
                    Nelson asserted that the documentary record had exploded since World War II, and
                    the HO historians cannot see all the records. David Patterson confirmed that he
                    recently was able to look at only 20 out of about 300 boxes in one AID lot file
                    for the Kennedy years. LaFantasie replied that the essay would be limited to
                    what the compilers know. Glad said any such essays should not be final
                    authoritative statements but representative of the compilers’ best
                    judgments.</p>
                <p>Glad and Rosenberg also asked questions and made suggestions for coverage of
                    other issues, particularly military assistance policy and information
                    policy.</p>
                <p>The Committee recessed for a break at 3:30.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--may-14--3-45-5-00_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, May 14, 3:45-5:00</hi></head>
                <p>The Committee reconvened at 3:45. Discussion of the Johnson volumes turned to the
                    draft table of contents which had been distributed to the Committee. Perkins
                    asked Slany to describe the process of preparing it. He replied that he and the
                    former Editor in Chief had prepared the first draft in consultation with the
                    compilers in 1989 and shown it to the Committee at that time. Mabon had
                    coordinated a second draft at the end of 1990 which also had input from the
                    entire compiling staff. The present draft had been prepared in the past two
                    months under LaFantasie’s leadership. LaFantasie explained that the process was
                    interactive between the General Editor, the Division Chiefs, and the compilers.
                    The present draft was by no means cast in concrete and the Office wanted the
                    Committee’s suggestions.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked if the Committee should suggest changes of emphasis. Slany pointed
                    out that the February 1991 Action Plan envisaged consultation with experts by
                    way of further refining the Johnson plan.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg believed the present draft neglected Latin America because it had been
                    alloted only three volumes out of up to 36. In addition, there were debatable
                    allocations within those three volumes, such as the entire volume devoted to the
                    Dominican Republic and almost a full volume on Cuba. There were not enough pages
                    for Brazil, Panama, and Nicaragua, and there was no allocation for Mexico. In
                    general -- and this appeared to be the case with the entire Johnson sub-series
                    as well -- there was too great an emphasis on military action and crises and not
                    enough on economics. Perkins said that it was preposterous to devote so much
                    time to the Dominican crisis, which was essentially a six-weeks’ wonder.</p>
                <pb n="20" xml:id="pg_20" facs="0015"/>
                <p>Mabon responded that page allocations for individual compilations in the Western
                    Hemisphere volume were extremely flexible and to a great extent the final result
                    would reflect the quality of the documentation as well as the significance of
                    the events covered. A more recent draft of this volume did have a page
                    allocation for Mexico. If many of the bilaterals were expanded, it might be
                    possible to take pages away from Cuba and group some of Central America with it.
                    He hesitated to recommend shortening the Dominican coverage at this time because
                    of the high-level involvement of U.S. officials, the evidence this crisis gave
                    of Johnson’s operating style, and the long-term effect of the crisis on the
                    Alliance for Progress and the inter-American system. Although regional economic
                    coverage perhaps needed to be strengthened, the <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> series was to some extent based on the preoccupations of the
                    highest officials at the time events occurred, and it documented the foreign and
                    national security policy process as well as relations with other nations.</p>
                <p>Taylor wondered if narcotics smuggling should get more attention. Keefer gave his
                    opinion that narcotics smuggling was not yet an acute problem in this time
                    period and that extended coverage of it might raise the problem of “reading
                    history backwards” by actively seeking out and describing the antecedents of
                    issues that only later became important.</p>
                <p>Herring said that the U.S. force structure was perhaps the biggest national
                    security issue during 1967-68 and he did not see it emphasized in the draft.
                    Kimball asked if there should be a whole volume on foreign policy organization.
                    Nelson responded emphatically in the affirmative, and Slany pointed out that the
                    Kennedy and Johnson periods had seen the disestablishment of the Department of
                    State as the chief foreign policy arm of the United States Government and that
                    the organizational as well as the operational aspects of the transition were of
                    the most profound importance. Mabon added that the period saw the establishment
                    of the modern NSC, with its powerful Adviser and staff of area and functional
                    experts. Slany pointed out the establishment of or enhanced role of such other
                    agencies as the USIA, the Peace Corps, and ACDA. Further discussion revealed a
                    consensus that while the organizational volume was important, finding worthy
                    documentation for it would be difficult. Harriet Schwar asserted that there
                    would be considerable documentation in individual stories reflecting
                    organizational changes.</p>
                <p>Kimball indicated that he was not suggesting that the volume on organizational
                    structure be dropped, but if more pages were needed to cover other more
                    important topics, he wondered where the space would come from.</p>
                <pb n="21" xml:id="pg_21" facs="0016"/>
                <p>Discussion moved back to questions of editorial technique. Nelson said she hoped
                    that page cuts would not be accompanied by a cut in annotation which summarized
                    important related documents and furnished other useful information. LaFantasie
                    said that annotation was important and would not be jettisoned, but simply be
                    brought back into control. Footnotes describing social occasions, for example,
                    might be dropped. Perkins felt that as the number of documents decreased, the
                    series owed the reader more in the way of annotation. LaFantasie agreed, but
                    pointed out that footnote inflation needed to be kept in check. As a documentary
                    editor, he was committed to publishing the texts of documents. The compiler’s
                    job would admittedly be more difficult than ever.</p>
                <p>Kimball indicated that he was uncomfortable with abstract discussion about major
                    changes planned for the series. The Committee was being asked to comment on new
                    approaches and ideas, but after today’s discussion he was not certain what these
                    approaches were. He suggested that the Office designate one of the Johnson
                    volumes early in the compiling process so that the Committee could be involved
                    in the “nitty-gritty” of selection and annotation. Slany pointed out that it
                    would be at least a half-year before a Johnson volume reached this stage, but
                    stated it might be possible for the Committee to look at a Kennedy volume. He
                    asked if the Committee wished to bring in experts to look at tables of contents.
                    Herring was not convinced either of these proposals was needed. At least in his
                    area, he thought the compilers had in the past resolved problems of selection
                    and annotation quite well. Nelson said that if the Committee was to have any
                    input into the compiling process, it should get involved now. Kimball agreed
                    that the Committee should consider setting up a subcommittee to examine proposed
                    editorial methodology for the Johnson volumes.</p>
                <p>There was further discussion about significant issues that should be documented
                    in the Johnson years. Picker noted that with the advent of communications
                    satellites there should be coverage of general telecommunications policy.
                    Rosenberg noted the importance of covering information policy, foreign economic
                    policy, and military and economic assistance programs. Mabon pointed out that
                    these had been covered in many volumes, including those on Southeast Asia.
                    Kimball wondered where HO would find documents on information policy, since USIA
                    stated it did not have many documents. Slany said the Office would find out.</p>
                <p>Taylor asked if there would be documents on the international impact of the civil
                    rights movement. Nina Noring indicated that occasional documentation on Africa
                    touched on the racial situation in the United States, but that with tight page
                    constraints HO’s ability to cover such incidents as discrimination faced by
                    African diplomats in the United States <pb n="22" xml:id="pg_22" facs="0017"/>
                    was limited and impinged on the compiler’s ability to cover such subjects as
                    Apartheid. Taylor said that he was not referring exclusively to coverage of
                    Africa and hoped that in regard to overall U.S. foreign policy, <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> would print as much as possible,
                    within page constraints, on civil rights issues.</p>
                <p>Nelson wanted to know why the volumes were being cut back since there was even
                    more covert action in the 1960s than in the 1950s. Van Camp felt that the
                    Committee must come to grips with the central issue of not being able to publish
                    more and more documents. Until it was possible to publish electronically, there
                    would have to be constraints.</p>
                <p>There was a brief discussion about the potential use of CD ROM. After being
                    informed that CD ROM was not yet a possibility for anything but replication of
                    already-printed volumes, Nelson suggested retention of microfiche. LaFantasie
                    cautioned that the problem with microfiche was work hours, both in PA/HO and in
                    HDR. If the Committee wanted microfiche, it was back to the drawing board on
                    everything. Nelson thought that in some ways the purpose of the legislation
                    would be defeated by a reduction in size, but LaFantasie pointed out that the
                    series was highly selective anyway. There was also no valid information as yet
                    on utilization, and therefore cost-effectiveness, of microfiche.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked the Committee to consider the idea of a subcommittee working with
                    the Office on a Kennedy administration volume that would exemplify the
                    compression envisaged for the Johnson years.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned at 5:00 p.m.</p>
                <pb n="23" xml:id="pg_23" facs="0018"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--may-15--9-00-10-30_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, May 15, 9:00-10:30</hi></head>
                <list>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Committee members</hi></head>
                            <item>Warren Kimball, Chairman</item>
                            <item>Betty Glad</item>
                            <item>George Herring</item>
                            <item>Anna Nelson</item>
                            <item>Bradford Perkins</item>
                            <item>Jane Picker</item>
                            <item>Emily Rosenberg</item>
                            <item>Arnold Taylor</item>
                            <item>Ann Van Camp</item>
                            <item>William Z. Slany, Exec. Secretary</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></head>
                            <item>G. Alfred Kennedy, Deputy Assistant Secretary of State Susan
                                Povenmire</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <item><hi rend="underline">Office of the Historian</hi></item>
                            <item>William Z. Slany</item>
                            <item>Glenn W. LaFantasie</item>
                            <item>Rita M. Baker</item>
                            <item>Vicki E. Futscher</item>
                            <item>Evans Gerakas </item>
                            <item>David H. Herschler</item>
                            <item>Edward C. Keefer</item>
                            <item>David W. Mabon</item>
                            <item>James E. Miller</item>
                            <item>Nina J. Noring</item>
                            <item>Charles S. Sampson</item>
                            <item>Jeffery A. Soukup</item>
                            <item>Shirley Taylor</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></head>
                            <item>Joe Chaddic, Chief, Historical Documents Review Division</item>
                            <item>George Tsukahira</item>
                        </list></item>
                    <item><list>
                            <head><hi rend="underline">Bureau of East Asia and Pacific
                                Affairs</hi></head>
                            <item>John Scott, Acting Director, Office of Japanese Affairs</item>
                        </list></item>
                </list>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--may-15--9-00-10-30_3">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, May 15, 9:00-10:30</hi></head>
                <p>The Subcommittee on <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1958-1960, Vol.
                    XVII, Japan (Glad, Herring, and Taylor) presented its report. Copies of a
                    classified synopsis of declassification issues, a precis of withheld documents,
                    and a draft memorandum to Under Secretary for Political Affairs Arnold Kanter
                    (P) were given to committee members to read.</p>
                <quote rend="blockquote">
                    <p>[Pages 24-28 consist of a classified discussion of <hi rend="underline"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi>, 1958-1960, Vol. XVII, Japan. Copies of the
                        classified minutes are available in PA/HO.]</p></quote>
                <pb n="29" xml:id="pg_29" facs="0019"/>
                <p>The Committee recessed at 10:45 for a coffee break.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="executive-session--may-15--11-00-12-00_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Executive Session, May 15, 11:00-12:00</hi></head>
                <p>[Following the break, the Committee convened in executive session to discuss its
                    recommendations on <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1958-1960, Vol.
                    XVII, Japan. The Committee recessed for luncheon at 12:05.]</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="luncheon-meeting-of-the-committee_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Luncheon Meeting of the Committee</hi></head>
                <p rend="center"><hi rend="underline">May 15, 1992, 12:00-1:30</hi></p>
                <p>During the working luncheon, the Committee heard a report from Anna Nelson
                    representing the subcommittee on interagency agreements on access. The other
                    member of the subcommittee, Jane Picker, had not received her package because
                    she had been away. She had an opportunity to briefly examine the package during
                    the course of the Committee meeting and indicated that Nelson’s report
                    represented the subcommittee’s views.</p>
                <p>Nelson commented on several of the agreements or memoranda on access received
                    from the various agencies. In particular, she expressed concern with the
                    separate letter of agreement provided by the Department of Defense. The letter
                    represented procedures for OSD records but was unclear whether the procedures
                    also included the other military agencies. The DOD procedures outlined in the
                    December 4 memorandum seemed cumbersome. There was also concern that access by
                    the Advisory Committee was not fully dealt with in accord with the legislation,
                    and that the OSD historian was not involved in this arrangement, as stipulated
                    in the legislation. The Committee urged the Historian to go back to DOD and seek
                    access agreements with all military agencies in accordance with the legislation.
                    Slany indicated that it would be helpful to have something in writing from the
                    Committee with which to approach DOD, and Kimball asked Nelson to draft the
                    Committee’s recommendation.</p>
                <p>Nelson mentioned that the NSA letter was in effect a refusal to sign an
                    agreement, although it did assign a liaison to cooperate in the NSA
                    participation in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series. Kimball
                    suggested that the Department Historian approach NSA with a request on the
                    Committee’s behalf to spell out the access procedures in an agreement. At
                    Slany’s request, Kimball agreed that the Committee would put this recommendation
                    in writing.</p>
                <pb n="30" xml:id="pg_30" facs="0020"/>
                <p>With regard to the Memorandum of Understanding with the CIA, Nelson expressed
                    concern with use of the word “timely” in CIA’s reference to providing security
                    clearances and need to know for access by Department Historians and members of
                    the Advisory Committee. The Committee recommended a follow-up by HO and/or the
                    Committee with Ken McDonald on this point.</p>
                <p>Nelson also raised minor concerns over the language of one or two items in the
                    NARA and NSC agreements. Overall, however, she indicated satisfaction with the
                    agreements that had been obtained, and asserted cautious optimism over their
                    implementation. The Committee concurred in these views.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--may-15--1-15-2-15_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, May 15, 1:15-2:15</hi></head>
                <p>[The Committee convened in executive session from 1:15 until 1:40 to continue it
                    deliberations over the Japan compilation.]</p>
                <p>Following the executive session, the Committee reconvened at 1:40. Discussion
                    continued on the plan for the Johnson volumes. Kimball proposed establishing a
                    subcommittee to go over the tables of contents for the volumes and proposed
                    changes in editorial methodology with LaFantasie.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg expressed concern that the Committee would be micromanaging the General
                    Editor’s efforts to improve and modernize <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi>. She favored the typical modes of Committee review for
                    evaluating the adequacy of the volumes.</p>
                <p>Nelson said she was interested in looking at LaFantasie’s proposed changes and
                    would serve on the subcommittee. Arnold Taylor also agreed to serve on this
                    subcommittee, which was tasked with looking at how LaFantasie’s ideas would be
                    carried out practically in a newly compiled Kennedy volume. This subcommittee
                    will plan to meet with LaFantasie in June. The Committee decided to defer
                    consideration of the 800 page/36 volume Johnson sub-series issue until it heard
                    the results of the Nelson-Taylor subcommittee.</p>
                <p>In response to Kimball’s query about upcoming problem volumes in the
                    declassification pipeline, David Herschler said that the committee may want to
                    review the declassification decisions on two compilations that were currently
                    under appeal: Indonesia (1958-1960 and 1961-1963) and National Security Policy
                    (1958-1960). HO had just been informed that the CIA may have a favorable
                    response on the Indonesia issue (first brought to the Committee’s attention a
                    year ago), but the Committee may want to appoint a subcommittee to review
                    National Security Policy, pending results of the current appeal with CIA and an
                    anticipated appeal to DOD.. Brad Perkins agreed to serve on the subcommittee
                    with Jane Picker.</p>
                <pb n="31" xml:id="pg_31" facs="0021"/>
                <p>As an aside, Kimball brought up the fact that State Department lawyers have
                    determined that the “terms” of current members of the Committee under the law
                    begin as of September 1, 1992 and expire August 31, 1993.</p>
                <p>Picker spoke about the concern of the American Society of International Law in
                    the Department’s proposal to cancel publication of the Law Digest and how the
                        <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series could cover some of this
                    material. The Committee agreed to place this item on the agenda for the next
                    meeting.</p>
                <p>The Committee built the following tentative agenda for its next meeting:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>(1) Johnson volume planning and editorial policy: subcommittee
                        report</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>(2) State declassification procedures and guidelines: subcommittee
                            report</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>(3) National Security Policy declassification: subcommittee
                        report</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>(4) Follow-up on implementation of the legislation</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>(5) Records management in the Department</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>(6) Treaty Series</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>(7) Department cancellation of the Law Digest</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>Kimball tried to get agreement on dates for the next meeting of the Committee,
                    but was unable to do so. Slany will canvass Committee members soon about
                    possible dates in July, September, and October.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked if there was anything the Committee could do about the withholding
                    from publication in <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> of documents
                    that were already in the public domain. Kimball said he knew of two documents
                    that were in the National Archives and yet were not cleared for publication in
                        <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>. Slany added that some day the
                    Department may not publish documents but have them cleared and made available
                    for research.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned at 2:15.</p>
                <pb n="32" xml:id="pg_32" facs="0022"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section"
                xml:id="advisory-committee-concerns-resulting-from-meeting-on-may-14-15--1992_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">ADVISORY COMMITTEE CONCERNS RESULTING FROM MEETING ON MAY
                        14-15, 1992</hi></head>
                <p rend="center">[<hi rend="underline">As Reported by the Committee
                    Chairman</hi>]</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1. CIA response regarding access to 1954 Guatemala records and 1953 Iran
                            records.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2. Delays in declassification of <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                                Relations</hi> volumes, particularly at other agencies for volumes
                            that were in the declassification process prior to enactment of P.L.
                            102-138.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3. The requirement of accelerating preparation and publication of <hi
                                rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> to meet the legislative
                            deadlines may result in the exclusion of important documents.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>4. The need for “older” Department records at the National Archives to be
                            reviewed and declassified, and public dissemination of information that
                            such files currently not reviewed and declassified will be reviewed upon
                            researcher request.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>5. A request for a Department report on general records management in the
                            Department and a separate report (or a focus in the general report) on
                            the disposition of INR records.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>6. The Department should give Congress early notice of requirement for
                            more resources to meet the legislative mandate for declassification and
                            opening of Department records at 30 years.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>7. Despite the problem of file breaks and within acceptable archival
                            practice, the principal of declassification of Department records at 30
                            years (i.e., the oldest record in a record block) should be the ultimate
                            goal.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>8. Bureaucratic confusion and inconsistency in the declassification
                            process.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>9. The need for consistency in the application of declassification
                            standards in the <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> clearance
                            process.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>10. The assumption that the CIA will now acknowledge that covert actions
                            were planned and occurred.</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="33" xml:id="pg_33" facs="0023"/>
                <p>Drafted: PA/HO:DHHerschler (663-1145)</p>
                <p>PC: ACMIN592 5/27/92</p>
                <table style="TableGrid" cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell>Clearances:</cell>
                        <cell>PA/HO: WZSlany</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>PA/HO: GWLaFantasie</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>PA/HO: RMBaker</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>PA: GAKennedy</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>DS/FPC/HDR: JHChaddic</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>EAP/J: JFScott</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>CIA: JKMcDonald</cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
