<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1993-11-04">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, November
                    1993</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1993</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1993-11-04">November 04, 1993</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <body>
            <pb n="1" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section"
                xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation-november-4-5-1993_1">
                <head>ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTATION November 4 - 5,
                    1993</head>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Committee Members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Warren F. Kimball, Chairman</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>George C. Herring</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Anna K. Nelson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Bradford Perkins</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jane M. Picker</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Emily S. Rosenberg</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Arnold H. Taylor</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Anne H. Van Camp</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Susan Povenmire, Special Assistant</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Office of The Historian</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>William Z. Slany, Historian</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Glenn W. LaFantasie</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David Baehler</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Rita M. Baker</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>M. Paul Claussen</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Vicki E. Futscher</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Evans Gerakas</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David C. Geyer</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David Herschler</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Kerry E. Hite</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Nina Howland</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Donna C. Hung</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David C. Humphrey</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Edward C. Keefer</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>James E. Miller</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David S. Patterson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Charles Sampson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Harriet D. Schwar</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeffrey A. Soukup</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Shirley T. Taylor</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Carolyn B. Yee</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Frank M. Machak, Director, IM/FPC</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Kenneth Rossman, Chief, Records Management IS/OIS/RA/RD</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Joe H. Chaddic, Director, IM/FPC/HDR</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>William C. Hamilton, HDR</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeanne Pryor, HDR</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Anthony C. E. Quainton, Assistant Secretary for Diplomatic
                        Security</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of East Asian and Pacific Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>John Dinger, Office of Japanese Affairs</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0002"/>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Inter-American Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Lee M. Peter, Deputy Director, Office of Caribbean Affairs
                        (ARA/CAR)</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Daniel Kiang, Office of Caribbean Affairs (ARA/CAR)</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>George C. Chalou, Archivist, Records Appraisal Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David A. Langbart, Archivist, Records Appraisal and Disposition
                            Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Michael Kurtz, Acting Assistant Archivist (NN)</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeanne Schauble, Director, Records Declassification Division Nancy Smith,
                            Archivist, Presidential Libraries</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Central Intelligence Agency</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>J. Kenneth McDonald, Chief Historian</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Public</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Page Putnam Miller, Director, National Coordinating Committee for
                            Promotion of History</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0003"/>
                <p><hi rend="underline">TABLE OF CONTENTS</hi></p>
                <table cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell>1. Open Session, November 4, 9:00 - 10:32 A.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Election of New Chairman</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_4">4</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report by the Historian on the Status of the Foreign Relations
                            series</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_5">5</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>2. Open Session, November 4, 10:50 - 11:40 A.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Discussion of Presidential Review Directive (PRD-29)</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_9">9</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>3. Luncheon Session, November 4, 12:00 - 2:00 P.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Meeting with Anthony C. E. Quainton Assistant Secretary for Diplomatic
                            Security</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_12">12</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>4. Closed Session November 4; 2:15 - 3:00 P.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Subcommittee Report on Foreign Relations Declassification
                            Problems</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_14">14</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>5. Closed Session, November 4, 3:15 - 4:40 P.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Subcommittee Report on Opening the Department of State 30-year Old and
                            Older Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_22">22</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>6. Closed Session, November 5, 9:00 - 10:30 A.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Discussion of Minutes</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_28">28</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>PRD-29 and Foreign Government Information</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_28">28</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Comments by CIA Historian J. Kenneth McDonald</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_33">33</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>7. Closed Session, November 5, 11:10 - 12 Noon</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report from Kenneth Rossman, Chief, Records Management</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_37">37</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Committee Discussion of CIA Records: FRUS Series</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_39">39</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Comments by the Historical Office Staff</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_40">40</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
                <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4" facs="0004"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--november-4--1993--9-12---10-30-a-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, November 4, 1993, 9:12 - 10:30</hi><hi
                        rend="underline"> A.M.</hi></head>
                <p>Chairman of the Committee, Warren F. Kimball opened the meeting at 9:12 a.m.</p>
                <p>The Committee re-elected Kimball as its Chairman.</p>
                <p>Kimball reported that Secretary Freeman would not be able to address the group
                    but would join them for lunch together with Secretary Quainton for a discussion
                    of PRD 29.</p>
                <p>A brief discussion by Kimball was given on the Montgomery Declassification
                    Conference and its consideration of PRD 29. He noted that the White House felt
                    that all the agencies had not been very helpful in their responses.</p>
                <p>Slany mentioned that Garfinkel had expressed deep disappointment at the
                    Montgomery meeting over the response of the agencies to the White House’s
                    determination to open up information. He said Garfinkel had stressed that in
                    spite of agency footdragging the White House would enforce openness.</p>
                <p>Kimball proposed that the approval of minutes for previous meetings be moved to
                    the second day of the meeting to allow members time to carefully read them.
                    Perkins asked why the delay in making them available. Slany explained that
                    during vetting inside the Department, issues of possible classification had
                    arisen as well as off-the-record remarks. Kimball added he had written a letter
                    dealing with these issues. Nelson expressed concern about removing
                    off-the-record from minutes. Kimball proposed two sets of minutes be kept: one
                    with the off-the-record and a sanitized version.</p>
                <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0005"/>
                <p>Slany gave the Historian report. He noted that publication of FRUS in the last 18
                    months had progressed at a rate that would permit the office to reach its
                    mandated line of 30 years by 1996. In particular, he noted that the production
                    of one volume per month was a record pace, and that the backlog was being
                    liquidated.</p>
                <p>He reported that the new Declassification Coordination Unit was operational and
                    now fully staffed under the direction of David Herschler. He introduced the
                    members of the new division. He explained that the new unit would increase HO’s
                    control over the declassification process and should give us a better handle on
                    planning and producing FRUS volumes. He further added that foreign government
                    information remained a big problem which the new executive order would hopefully
                    address.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked when should the Committee become involved in the foreign government
                    information (FGI) issue. Slany said HO would welcome the Committee’s views.
                    Rosenberg stated she would like to see all the drafts dealing with the
                    definition before the committee became involved.</p>
                <p>The committee discussed whether to intervene at this stage or later, and inquired
                    as to current policy regarding the handling of the material.</p>
                <p>Jeanne Pryor of HDR stated that foreign government information (FGI) is sent out
                    at the same time as other agency for review. She also stated that only two
                    documents were currently outstanding. HDR preferred to have clearance within the
                    bureaus prior to sending out any documents of foreign or other agency review.
                    This made the process simpler and more effective.</p>
                <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6" facs="0006"/>
                <p>Herschler gave a review of the new office procedures for handling foreign
                    government information, stressing that the system was still in its early stages.
                    Taylor asked whether foreign governments were responding promptly and what could
                    be done if they were slow. Slany replied that the office would do whatever is
                    necessary to get a prompt reply from foreign governments. The committee
                    commented that they would monitor Herschler and staff and the handling of
                    reference documents.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked if the NSC remained a roadblock to progress. In reply, a number of
                    speakers stressed NSC manpower limitations. Chaddic reported that two HDR
                    employees were going to the NSC to aid in breaking its backlog.</p>
                <p>Continuing his report, Slany informed the committee of an agreement with INR for
                    the use of its records stating the similarity between CIA.</p>
                <p>Kimball brought up the issue of the right of INR to refuse access to committee
                    members.[No. 11 of the agreement.] Members agreed that any right would be
                    limited since they all had access to the proper level of clearances. Kimball
                    asked Slany to get a clarification of the paragraph.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg ask about the “Perkins chart.”</p>
                <p>Some technical difficulties prevented the preparation of an up-to-date chart for
                    this meeting, Slany explained, but said material had been prepared to give the
                    Committee the same kind of information.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg stressed how useful the chart is. She went on to inquire whether the
                    CIA production of the 11 covert actions of thirty years ago mentioned by the DCI
                    would overlap with FRUS and how it might impact on the volumes.</p>
                <pb n="7" xml:id="pg_7" facs="0007"/>
                <p>Slany said that HO wanted to coordinate on this with the CIA, but it was
                    difficult to see what the CIA had for documentation. He also pointed out that
                    the FRUS volumes in which many of these actions might properly have been
                    included have already been published.</p>
                <p>Kimball wanted an FRUS volume on these and stressed the need to have them under
                    the FRUS umbrella. Taylor wanted to be sure that any catch up effort would not
                    delay other FRUS volumes.</p>
                <p>There followed a discussion on how or whether the committee could advise or
                    pressure the CIA to get on with the project with particular emphasis on getting
                    the CIA’s advisory committee to start meeting again.</p>
                <p>In response to a question from Kimball, Slany noted that the CIA had about twenty
                    FRUS volumes under review at the present time. However, the agency pleaded that
                    its resources were committed to other statutory requirements so FRUS was getting
                    low priority. In the worst possible scenario the FRUS publication schedule could
                    hit a wall in late 1994 if this road block was not broken.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie stated that HO was not satisfied with CIA handling of this issue nor
                    with the CIA response to the raising of this question.</p>
                <p>Kimball added that the problem is that the CIA is giving priority in use of its
                    limited resources to special projects rather than FRUS. A decision is needed at
                    the top.</p>
                <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0008"/>
                <p>Rosenberg noted that at the Montgomery conference the CIA invited the Committee
                    to give it directions on what was important. It was time to intervene to stress
                    that FRUS needed the top priority, and to move to include CIA covert actions
                    publicly announced by the DCI into FRUS. The committee should go to the
                    top--writing CIA, State and CIA declassification.</p>
                <p>Slany agreed that a high level policy decision was needed. Kimball asked if the
                    message should go to both CIA and State. Van Camp felt that procedurally it
                    should go through State.</p>
                <p>Kimball and Rosenberg insisted that the committee had both precedent and an
                    invitation to go directly to CIA. It was suggested by LaFantasie to prioritize
                    our needs for CIA and also the need for specific decisions. After some further
                    debate, Kimball asked LaFantasie to draft a letter.</p>
                <p>Slany continued his report noting good cooperation from other agencies in access
                    to documentation for FRUS. Perkins asked if any progress had been made with NSA.
                    Slany replied no, but that HO was pursuing this matter. Howland and Schwar
                    described the cooperation they had received from JCS and DOD.</p>
                <p>Slany stated HO was still working on Treasury and Justice.</p>
                <p>Langbart reported that NARA had received Naval Security Group records and now had
                    legal custody. The records are not declassified and will be open in response to
                    FOIA requests. The records comprise 1500 cu. ft--and include about 15000
                    microfilm reels.</p>
                <p>The meeting broke for coffee at 10:30 a.m.</p>
                <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0009"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--november-4--10-50---11-40-a-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, November 4, 10:50 - 11:40 a.m.</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball called for the committee’s unofficial consensus on PRD-29 reached at a
                    dinner discussion (November 3), attended by committee members, except Taylor and
                    Herring. (Taylor had a prior engagement and Herring had a class.)</p>
                <p>In response, Rosenberg stated the goal of the committee’s stance, and its
                    official capacity to inform the members’ constituents. She said Kimball would
                    draft a three-part document:(1) asserting the public’s right to know; (2)
                    expressing concern over the workability and usefulness of the draft executive
                    order.</p>
                <p>While the committee will endorse principle of both systematic review and
                    automatic review, with a drop dead date, they are troubled by: problems involved
                    in the 6/10 year reviews; and the problem of the integrity of the archives that
                    would arise if documents were pulled out in connection with those reviews. Other
                    concerns included the need for better issue specific standards of exemption,
                    performance target dates, narrow the definition of foreign government
                    information, and weakness of the oversight committee.</p>
                <p>The question still remaining was, at what years to conduct a systematic automatic
                    review, 20/25, 20/30, 40 years. Morefield pointed out the complexity of 6/10
                    years review for all pre-1988 records. The 3) issue is the integrity of the
                    records. Too many reviews threatened the records integrity. Rosenberg said that
                    section 125b of the legislation had more appropriate wording for exemption from
                    declassification than the draft executive order.</p>
                <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0010"/>
                <p>Kimball summarized some points made at the Maxwell Conference. There would be no
                    substantive changes to the E.O. unless the task force was unanimous. The
                    oversight commission is not strong enough to police this project, and NARA
                    should be represented. The E.O. would go to the White House and the NSC as is by
                    November 11. The President wants to sign it now, but the NSC says the White
                    House does not want to see the draft more restrictive than it is now. The White
                    House wants a drop dead date with exceptions. The key is how will Congress
                    receive it.</p>
                <p>Kimball has a copy of the Department of State’s review of the executive order.
                    The Department wants to tighten restrictions on foreign government information,
                    but apparently the Bureau of Public Affairs does not agree.</p>
                <p>Herring asked if the Deparment’s review would stop at the Garfinkel committee or
                    go on to the White House. Kimball said Mr. Garfinkel would make known its
                    concerns to the White House.</p>
                <p>Slany said that the people assigned to carry out the Presidential directive were
                    uninformed about White House expectations, reminding him of the Carter executive
                    order which failed to make records more accessible to the public. Nelson said
                    that according to Mr. Garfinkel the White House was concerned about
                    Congressional reaction. Slany noted that Congress wanted legislation. Nelson
                    said, access should be open enough so that Congress does not challenge it.
                    Kimball remarked that Senator Helms wanted the Department of State records to be
                    like an open book. Representative Hamilton’s staff had asked for a copy of the
                    draft executive order, but they were denied it, even after it was reported in
                    the press.</p>
                <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0011"/>
                <p>Page Miller noted that Congress initially had not seen the draft executive order
                    and then expected big changes and therefore hasn’t been lined up as an ally but
                    is potentially a helpful one.</p>
                <p>Kimball said he would redraft points 1 and 2 of his letter, asked the committee
                    to respond within the month with suggestions, and asked where to send the
                    letter.</p>
                <p>Page Miller said it would be useful to discuss the “years” for review in the new
                    E.O.</p>
                <p>There followed a discussion of two-tiered review system: 20 year systematic
                    review date and 30 year drop dead date. Kimball asked for comments on a
                    two-tiered system (no objections were expressed).</p>
                <p>Kimball went on to talk about 6 and 10 year rules for Confidential and Secret
                    material. Langbart said (expressing his own personal view point) that 6 and 10
                    year dates were too much to deal with and raised the issue of the integrity of
                    the records. One date for review of all records would avoid duplication of
                    effort. Nelson and Rosenberg agreed that multiple reviews would harm the
                    integrity of the records. They apparently favored a 20/30 year review.</p>
                <p>Chaddic asked where were the resources for a 6/10 year review; he preferred one
                    review at 30 years.</p>
                <p>Herring said researchers would not benefit by bits and pieces that would come out
                    at early reviews. Perkins preferred to state that it wouldn’t work.</p>
                <pb n="12" xml:id="pg_12" facs="0012"/>
                <p>Kimball and Herschler pointed out that the draft executive order provided for
                    declassification of confidential material after 6 years, secret material after
                    10 years, and top secret after 15 years, unless classification was upgraded or
                    extended. Dr. Kimball said that according to Mr. Garfinkel that 6/10 year
                    declassification of confidential would not be systematic, but only done on
                    specific requests.</p>
                <p>While the committee applauded the spirit of the 6/10-year rule, it put its
                    support behind review at 20/30 years.</p>
                <p>Dr. Kimball said that Assistant Secretary Quainton could not have lunch with the
                    Committee, because of another luncheon engagement, but that he would meet with
                    them for 30 minutes of discussion.</p>
                <p>The committee recessed for lunch.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="luncheon-meeting-november-4--1993_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Luncheon Meeting November 4, 1993</hi></head>
                <p>Anthony C. E. Quainton, Assistant Secretary for Diplomatic Security, joined the
                    Committee during its working luncheon on Thursday, November 4. He was introduced
                    to the Committee by Bennett Freeman, Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public
                    Affairs.</p>
                <p>Mr. Quainton thanked the Committee for giving him the opportunity to meet its
                    members, and he spoke at length about the present situation concerning the
                    Department’s response to the draft Executive Order on Classification/
                    Declassification that ISOO had created and circulated as a result of PRD 29. Mr.
                    Quainton said that the Department, despite its desire to assist the
                    Administration’s policies of openness, could not support the draft in its
                    present form. He said the Department, <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0013"/>
                    through his bureau, had responded to the draft, and that he hoped the many
                    changes the Department recommended could be incorporated into a new
                    document.</p>
                <p>He explained that the Department was concerned with three deficiencies in the
                    present draft: 1) that it would jeopardize protecting national security
                    information (especially regarding the way in which classified or confidential
                    foreign government information is protected); 2) that it failed to address
                    crucial resource problems, particularly in this era of downsizing; and 3) that
                    automatic downgrading of confidential documents after 6 years (with the
                    possibility that agencies could upgrade documents they wished to keep
                    classified) would present insurmountable problems of time and resources.</p>
                <p>Professor Kimball pointed out that resources, especially in the case of the
                    automatic downgrading of confidential materials, was only a problem if agencies
                    operated under the presumption that page by page review of documents would be
                    required. Professor Kimball said, however, that it was the view of Steven
                    Garfinkel, Director of ISOO, who had made a presentation at a recent interagency
                    conference on classification and declassification, that the downgrading of such
                    material could be handled on a “per request” basis through FOIA or mandatory
                    review. Mr. Quainton said that the draft executive order, as written, was not
                    being interpreted that way by the Department.</p>
                <p>Professor Kimball also said that he felt that the formal response of the
                    Department to the draft executive order, which he had recently read, seemed to
                    make no substantive strides toward the openness policy that the president has
                    been advocating. Mr. Quainton said that openness had to be weighed against the
                    very real concerns of protecting national security information.</p>
                <pb n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0014"/>
                <p>Professor Kimball said that the Committee was not satisfied with the Department’s
                    response to the draft executive order. He argued that the Department, in
                    responding to the law requiring the opening of its records within 30 years of
                    the events documented had developed an action plan incorporating innovative
                    policies and procedures. He believed the Department’s example could be
                    implemented government-wide through the new executive order.</p>
                <p>Mr. Quainton said that the problem was really a resource one, and that he had to
                    keep that firmly focused, but that he was more than willing at any time to
                    discuss these matters further with the Committee and to see how greater openness
                    could be realistically achieved. He also indicated that there would be time to
                    revise the draft executive order, despite the immediate November deadline. He
                    said that the process would take quite a while from this draft to any final
                    executive order that might be issued. He also indicated that it was possible
                    that Congress might step forward to assert its own oversight over the entire
                    domain of classification and declassification of documents.</p>
                <p>Professor Kimball thanked Mr. Quainton for attending, and told him the Committee
                    would look forward to dealing with him on this matter in the future.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--november-4--2-15---3-00-p-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, November 4, 2:15 - 3:00 P.M.</hi></head>
                <p>The Committee reconvened at 2:15 p.m. Kimball noted that the discussion of PRD-29
                    would continue tomorrow morning.</p>
                <p>Perkins began the report of the subcommittee on <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> declassification problems. He began with the Tibet 1958-1960
                    documents. HO had sought re-review of 13 documents <pb n="15" xml:id="pg_15"
                        facs="0015"/> because the information was in the public domain. HDR has
                    released a good deal of information about Tibet but has deleted several
                    classified passages. The CIA has not completed its review of these documents but
                    Director Woolsey has said publicly that the agency is committed to opening
                    records about the Tibetan uprising in 1959.</p>
                <p>Picker said that certain deleted information about was important. The question is
                    whether the Dalai Lama himself wanted to release the material. Why not consult
                    with him? Is there a procedure for this situation? The Desk Officer’s advice was
                    followed without regard for the foreign interests (not necessarily a
                    government).</p>
                <p>Herring asked Perkins if everything else in the volume was OK. Perkins replied
                    that only specific information about the Dalai Lama was deleted. Kimball noted
                    that with respect to the State Department review the specific information was
                    probably not important to the integrity of the overall record. This specific
                    instance was not important but the issue raises a principle that the Committee
                    should decide on.</p>
                <p>Perkins explained the rationale for the State Department excisions. Kimball
                    pointed out the difference between official U.S. Government policy and
                    unofficial accounts or memoirs.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked if a reader could read between the lines and figure out what had
                    been deleted about Tibet. Perkins and Kimball both said yes. LaFantasie said the
                    excisions are “surgical.” Kimball agreed that HDR made such surgical excisions
                    and that the whole story is there.</p>
                <pb n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0016"/>
                <p>The Committee accepted the excisions for the Tibet documents and asked how long
                    the CIA would need to review them. LaFantasie said HO has to manage the issue of
                    CIA clearances and Kimball noted that the issue of coordination with the CIA
                    would be discussed tomorrow.</p>
                <p>Picker began the discussion of the 1961-1963 Japan compilation. Several documents
                    were denied an issue relating to the 1960 Treaty. Edwin O. Reischhauer mentioned
                    this episode in his memoirs. Keefer pointed out that it was first reported in
                    the <hi rend="underline">Washington Post</hi>.</p>
                <p>Kimball said he understands there is a world of difference between a report in
                    public media and the U.S. Government release of that information.</p>
                <p>Picker discussed this issue. She wondered if <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> volumes would present a distorted picture of U.S. policy
                    toward Japan in the long term if this material were to be withheld. She was
                    concerned about the long-term implications of these deletions. The Desk Officer
                    said revealing this information could damage current foreign relations.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked if the U.S. Senate knows about the classified information being
                    withheld from the volume. Kimball thought it was probably not widely known, only
                    in the Select Committee on Intelligence.</p>
                <p>Perkins said the Committee had agreed for the previous volume to settle for a
                    note in the Preface. Should we repeat the note in this and future volumes?</p>
                <p>Kimball noted that the Desk Officer and the HDR reviewer had gone as far as they
                    could.</p>
                <pb n="17" xml:id="pg_17" facs="0017"/>
                <p>Herring asked how many documents were involved. Herschler said not many were
                    involved. Picker said that what is left is “absolutely misleading.” Herring
                    believed that if the record is distorted, then it must be noted in the
                    Preface.</p>
                <p>Kimball said he didn’t disagree with the excisions but the Committee was left
                    with a long-term problem of a distorted record, particularly with reference to
                    U.S. relations with Japan.</p>
                <p>Perkins continued the subcommittee’s report, turning to another topic related to
                    U.S.-Japan relations in this timeframe. He thought it might be possible to
                    excise documents to include expressions of broad philosophical guestions of U.S.
                    fears and goals, while deleting specific instances.</p>
                <p>Kimball noted that it was OK to release documentation on attitudes but not
                    specific plans. Nelson pointed out that, in that case, there would be no
                    information on the classified information withheld from the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> volume. She used the Iran volume as an example.</p>
                <p>Kimball noted that such classified information with respect to our allies is more
                    sensitive than with respect to our enemies. What is the practical, realistic way
                    to deal with this issue?</p>
                <p>The Desk Officer pointed out with respect to the political situation in Japan
                    that many of the organizations still exist, such as the LDP, which is the
                    largest Japanese political party and may return to power.</p>
                <p>Nelson said that we should remember that Japan objects to everything we release
                    so we should move forward on this, whether the issue is sensitive or not.</p>
                <pb n="18" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0018"/>
                <p>Slany said that the Committee still has the option to go to superiors in the
                    Department -- the Under Secretary of State for Management.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg pointed out that the Committee appealed the 1958-1960 Japan volume. She
                    favors also taking this volume to the higher level to show that the Committee
                    can take a strong stand.</p>
                <p>Herring asked if the appeal should be on both historical issues related to the
                    U.S./Japan relations on this volume.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg said, she feels uneasy about going ahead with a volume that has this
                    many problems.</p>
                <p>Perkins stated his belief that the declassification decisions would not be
                    reversed.</p>
                <p>Picker asked if this meant that the Committee should revisit the 1958-1960 Japan
                    volume and add footnotes to documents with information similar to the issues
                    compiled in the volume. Nelson pointed out that the denied documents are
                    accounted for with headings and file references.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that this is an endless issue and the appeal must address the
                    classified issue more broadly. Nelson replied that the appeal should be
                    restricted to the specific volume.</p>
                <p>Picker said that the Committee should always have a statement in the Preface. New
                    language should be drafted to connect declassification problems from one volume
                    to the next.</p>
                <pb n="19" xml:id="pg_19" facs="0019"/>
                <p>Kimball turned to Slany and asked who frames the appeal. Slany answered that it
                    was a joint appeal from PA/HO and the regional bureau. Kimball asked if they
                    should appeal all the documents. Keefer replied probably not all, just those
                    that address the broader issues of analysis and attitudes, not details.</p>
                <p>Kimball assigned Slany to put together the appeal and Perkins and Picker to write
                    whatever Committee resolution is needed. Slany agreed to submit a draft to
                    them.</p>
                <p>Chaddic asked if there would be two appeals, one now and one after the CIA
                    review. LaFantasie noted that this would be an internal appeal.</p>
                <p>The subcommittee report next turned to the 1961-1963 compilation on British
                    Guiana, (now Guyana). Perkins summarized the issues. HDR, he said, has deleted
                    all the “juicy stuff.” This leaves a very misleading picture of U.S. policy and
                    attitudes.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that if all the intended deletions are made, then the story that is
                    left is incomplete. Taylor said he thought the comments of diplomats should be
                    retained because it was indicative of the attitudes of the time.</p>
                <p>Lee Peters, Deputy Director of Caribbean Affairs, said that releasing this
                    information might become an issue in current domestic Guyanese politics.</p>
                <pb n="20" xml:id="pg_20" facs="0020"/>
                <p>Perkins asked if it was possible to separate the issues. Herschler noted that 47
                    of 61 documents have been denied by the Bureau. In the re-review the Desk has
                    indicated some would be released in part. The CIA is now reviewing 26
                    documents.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that this briefing is for the Committee’s information and he feels
                    that the Committee is up-to-speed on this issue. Nelson pointed out that this
                    classified information withheld from the volume is very important.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg said this issue should be seen in an historical context. It made good
                    sense for current policy to disclose this information. In this way, this
                    information can support the current policy of supporting democratic
                    processes.</p>
                <p>The Desk Officer said the Committee must realize that the impact on American
                    historians is different from the impact on foreign politicians.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg noted that as part of a pattern for disclosures, this is a minor
                    matter. Kimball said that what happened in the past is part of our past policies
                    and he asked that the Desk consider this issue in that light.</p>
                <p>Picker agreed with Taylor’s point made earlier and said that refusing to release
                    the language distorted the record regarding the attitudes of the time. Herschler
                    told him that 18-20 of the denied documents contain foreign government
                    information.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked if anyone had checked to see if the U.K. Government had released the
                    documents. Members of the Committee agreed that this was a good idea.</p>
                <pb n="21" xml:id="pg_21" facs="0021"/>
                <p>Rosenberg concluded by saying that the Desk has heard the Committee’s concerns
                    and let them reconsider based on those.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned for a break at 3:05.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="advisory-committee--november-4--3--15-4-40-p-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Advisory Committee, November 4, 3: 15-4:40
                    p.m.</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball called the meeting to order and called for a hearing of the report of the
                    Rosenberg-Nelson Van Camp subcommittee on the Suitland Archive records
                    declassification operation.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg reported that she and Nelson had gone to Suitland the previous day to
                    meet with officials there. On the whole, she and Nelson were astonished at the
                    level of accomplishment there. In dramatic contrast to the situation a year and
                    a half ago, an impressive system for rapidly processing documents was now in
                    place, and HDR had furnished the Archives with all guidelines needed to review
                    this record block.</p>
                <p>The new single review system, based on categories of documents examined by HDR’s
                    experienced Foreign Service reviewer group, seems to be going faster. The
                    central files for 1960-1963 have been reviewed. The withholding of documents has
                    been cut by 50 percent -- from a range of 5 to 6 percent down to a range of 2 or
                    3 percent. The majority of the withheld material concerns intelligence sources.
                    HDR is progressing with the review of the 1960-1962 record bloc and is also
                    looking at some lot files and at some boxes from which to much material had been
                    withdrawn by NARA reviewers.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg continued by noting that the committee’s constituents were of course
                    anxious to know when the material <pb n="22" xml:id="pg_22" facs="0022"/> would
                    actually be available to scholars. The 1963 bloc should be available this
                    winter; the 1960-1962 bloc will not be open until the move to Archives II. HDR
                    expects to meet the legislative deadline on reviewing, but access is contingent
                    on NARA having the resources to do the necessary processing. She noted that the
                    Committee had not seen a description of all the records material nor a
                    prioritized schedule for review. It would like to see these but did not want to
                    slow down the progress of the work.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg expressed the subcommittee’s disappointment that no inter-agency task
                    force or risk assessment group has been formed and that nothing had been done
                    about getting other agencies to review the other-agency documents and documents
                    with other-agency equities which are being withheld. The database listing the
                    withheld documents has not been given to other agencies.</p>
                <p>Kimball noted that during the meetings of the working group that developed the
                    declassification plan, there had been discussion of giving other agencies a
                    “drop-dead date,” or deadline after which their documents would be declassified
                    unless they took action. Rosenberg said the subcommittee had raised this with
                    Morefield who had said this was not possible. She stated that the subcommittee
                    didn’t want to get into details but thought there should be some inter-agency
                    effort.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg raised the subject of a new categories of records accessioned to the
                    National Archives as a result of the legislation, in particular Roger Channel
                    messages from INR and administrative records.</p>
                <pb n="23" xml:id="pg_23" facs="0023"/>
                <p>Langbart stated that Roger Channel telegrams in the central files are being
                    withdrawn from the files and stored in a segregated area in NARA.</p>
                <p>Nelson noted that the legislation requires declassification of all records,
                    including administrative records and post files. She thought the progress that
                    had been made was phenomenal but wondered if it can be said that the records are
                    truly available for research when so much material has been withdrawn. There is
                    no inter-agency effort and apparently will not be until the records have been
                    move to Archives II. The major glitches, she thought, were (1) the problem of
                    documents with other-agency equity and (2) the question of how NARA can do all
                    that it has to do in this process.</p>
                <p>Chaddic then responded to the subcommittee’s concerns. With respect to an
                    inventory, he noted that Ken Rossman had produced a very helpful 44-page
                    inventory of Department of State records 30 or more years old, in the possession
                    either of the Department or the National Archives, that had not yet been
                    declassified. Copies of this inventory were then distributed to members of the
                    committee. With respect to prioritization, Chaddic said he needed some guidance.
                    At the fast rate the project was proceeding, it was not necessary to prioritize
                    the central files, but it was necessary to prioritize the lot files and the post
                    files.</p>
                <p>With respect to interagency review, Chaddic indicated that while this was an
                    important area and one that he was committed to, it was not something the
                    Department could impose on the National Archives. There simply wasn’t enough
                    room at NARA to bring new people in at a time when preparations were underway
                    for a move to Archives II. Chaddic indicated that his solution would be to
                    perform the interagency review within the <pb n="24" xml:id="pg_24" facs="0024"
                    /> Department of State building. Chaddic said that since his staff was already
                    releasing 97 out of every 100 pages, it would be a good time to invite the CIA
                    to work with the Department in reviewing the records. Although 3 pages out of
                    every 100 were now being tabbed, this figure could be reduced when the
                    Department of State internal review program became functional.</p>
                <p>In response to another question, he stated that very little material was withheld
                    because of NSC equity; most of it consisted of head of state correspondence.
                    Kimball noted that the August subcommittee was concerned about some confusion
                    about the privacy issue. Chaddic stated that they were working on this.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if it would be a big problem for NARA if CIA reviewers went to
                    Suitland to check the documents withheld because of CIA equity. Russell said it
                    would be no problem. Kimball asked for an estimate of how much time would be
                    necessary for CIA review of the CIA equity documents in the 1963 central files.
                    Russell estimated 10 person days. Chaddic said he didn’t know how soon HDR would
                    have space available for this. Michael Kurtz noted that it was always possible
                    to find a few more desks at Suitland.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that the committee would like an interim response (rather than
                    waiting for its next meeting) on getting the process of declassification teams
                    started at Suitland. Rosenberg and Van Camp pointed out that any documents which
                    were released represented a savings for NARA, since all withheld documents have
                    to be logged on the computer, and withdrawal sheets have to be prepared.</p>
                <pb n="25" xml:id="pg_25" facs="0025"/>
                <p>Perkins asked whether it was possible to reduce the duplication of effort in
                    declassifying documents which are in the central files and also in lot files.
                    Could the declassified documents be recorded in a computer to avoid more than
                    one review? Chaddic stated that the volume of documents was far too great; other
                    committee members agreed. Rosenberg asked if lists of documents declassified for
                    FRUS could be made available to NARA; Herschler stated that the FRUS databases
                    could be made available, but Russell noted that there was a problem of software
                    incompatibility. Chaddic said that HDR reviewers at Suitland often get in touch
                    with FRUS reviewers. Kimball said anything Chaddic could do to improve the
                    exchange of information would be endorsed by the Committee.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg stated that the subcommittee had concluded that this approach was
                    unnecessary since the review of the central files was progressing so much faster
                    than originally anticipated. The subcommittee thought that efforts should be
                    made instead to get interagency cooperation in review of withheld documents.
                    Picker asked about drop-dead date for other agencies. Kimball stated that the
                    Department was unwilling to do this. Chaddic expressed willingness to approach
                    the CIA about review of withheld documents. Kimball stated that if the CIA was
                    not cooperative, that would be the Committee’s problem.</p>
                <p>Nelson stated that the subcommittee was struck with the contrast with the
                    Department’s position 2 years ago that such speedy review was impossible. She
                    thought the progress was commendable and that other things which were thought to
                    be impossible were perhaps also possible.</p>
                <pb n="26" xml:id="pg_26" facs="0026"/>
                <p>Michael Kurtz reported that the 16 archivists and technicians now working
                    exclusively on the Department of state declassification project should be caught
                    up by next summer. The plan is to review over 1,000,000 more pages, according to
                    a quarterly schedule. The more other agencies could be involved, the faster the
                    process would go.</p>
                <p>Van Camp referred to Chaddic’s statement that he would welcome the committee’s
                    help on prioritization. She thought Chaddic had 3 sources of information for
                    this purpose: the files themselves, NARA information on user needs, and FRUS
                    projections. Chaddic stated that he had merely meant that he would welcome the
                    committee’s ideas on the subject.</p>
                <p>Kimball reviewed the agenda for the next day and mentioned that he had talked
                    with John Pereira at the ISOO conference in Alabama.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--november-5--9-00---10-30-a-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, November 5, 9:00 - 10:30 A.M.</hi></head>
                <p>Kimball called the meeting to order. He noted that yesterday Secretary of State
                    Christopher testified before Congress and the question of
                    declassification/classification arose. Christopher made a very strong statement
                    in favor of openness. Kimball suggested that the Committee might want to preface
                    its letter to Christopher on PRD-29 by quoting from these remarks.</p>
                <p>Kimball then outlined the day’s agenda: 1) Ken Rossman’s report on the inventory
                    of 30 year-old records would be made at 11 a.m.; 2) the last meetings minutes
                    would be approved; 3) the committee would discuss PDR 29; 4) Ken McDonald would
                    report on the CIA’s program; 5)the HO staff would be given time to express some
                    of their concerns.</p>
                <pb n="27" xml:id="pg_27" facs="0027"/>
                <p>Nelson asked that the Office of the Historian report on its access to INR files
                    by the next meeting.</p>
                <p>Slany responded that the Office would do so.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if there was any queries about the minutes?</p>
                <p>Van Camp asked if Anna Nelson’s memorandum could be attached to the last minutes
                    as a correction.</p>
                <p>Kimball stated that he did not believe it constituted a correction.</p>
                <p>Nelson suggested that they were a clarification.</p>
                <p>Kimball responded that the memorandum was more like the extended remarks that are
                    added to the Congressional record.</p>
                <p>Nelson would not accept that definition.</p>
                <p>Kimball announced that the Committee would go into executive session. For seven
                    minutes the Committee was in executive session and no records were made.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested the Committee should discuss PDR 29 until McDonald arrive.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg thought that there was much to discuss. She remarked that the
                    Committee’s report was in process. She noted that the Secretary of State’s
                    public statements to Congress differed dramatically from the Department of
                    State’s official response to PRD 29.</p>
                <p>Herring asked if Foreign Government Information would be included in the letter
                    to the Secretary?</p>
                <pb n="28" xml:id="pg_28" facs="0028"/>
                <p>Kimball recommended that FGI not be changed. He made this decision after reading
                    the Department of State response to PRD-29 in which the Department tried to
                    change fundamentally the concept of FGI. In the PRD 29 draft, FGI results from
                    an explicit statement that the information is given in confidence. The
                    Department of State wants to expand the concept to virtually all diplomatic
                    conversations.</p>
                <p>Rosenburg suggested one revision in Kimball’s draft letter. [Not having the
                    letter it is impossible to determine the revision, but Kimball agreed.]</p>
                <p>Kimball then stated that the Department of State wanted to make FGI more of a
                    restrictive factor in preventing declassification.</p>
                <p>Herschler remarked that the current executive order states that FGI is only
                    considered when it is expressed or implied.</p>
                <p>Picker noted that in draft PRD 29 there was no requirement that the nature of the
                    damage of FGI be assessed.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested that a damage assessment was required in the exemption
                    statement.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg suggested that FGI and its potential damage was always a matter of
                    interpretation no matter how you defined it.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested that it would be advantageous to retain the word “expressed”
                    when defining FGI. It should be kept in the equation.</p>
                <p>Herschler noted that, if material was deemed FGI, it had to either be denied or
                    sent to the foreign government for clearance.</p>
                <pb n="29" xml:id="pg_29" facs="0029"/>
                <p>Rosenburg suggested more revisions to Kimball’s draft letter, in this case, the
                    elimination of language.</p>
                <p>Kimball countered with suggested language, “the Historical Advisory Committee
                    believes that the American public expects…”</p>
                <p>Perkins remarked that when he talked to Clifford Warton last night, the Deputy
                    Secretary was attentive to public opinion.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg asked if the Committee agreed to her suggested revisions.</p>
                <p>Perkins read the damage relations section of the draft PRD and noted it was very
                    expansive and could be used to deny about anything.</p>
                <p>Kimball noted that the automatic declassification was a little more liberal in
                    the PRD-29 draft.</p>
                <p>Picker asked how the “damage of relations” concept was related to FGI?</p>
                <p>Kimball stated that FGI was not intended to have a damage standard.</p>
                <p>Picker suggested that when FGI was denied there should be some presentation of
                    how this would damage relations.</p>
                <p>Perkins suggested that the only reason for denial is that it is FGI.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested that the only justification for release is that this
                    information is not FGI.</p>
                <pb n="30" xml:id="pg_30" facs="0030"/>
                <p>Picker returned to the Japan example. She asked if the meeting was a closed one
                    and was informed that it was. The subcommittee was told that release of certain
                    information of discussions with Japanese officials relating to aspects of
                    implementation of the US-Japan Treaty of Mutual Security of 1960 would cause
                    damage to U.S.-Japanese relations.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested that some kind of damage to relations test was required.</p>
                <p>Ken McDonald suggested that it was merely a question of reciprocity. The U.S.
                    promised not to release Japanese information and the Japanese would not do the
                    same with U.S. information.</p>
                <p>Kimball stated that the United States needed to have declassification authority
                    and some standard to judge FGI.</p>
                <p>David Langbart suggested that foreign government information was foreign
                    government information, damage was not the issue. It is the foreign government’s
                    information.</p>
                <p>Nelson suggested an example. If the Iraqi Ambassador told a U.S. diplomat that
                    Nasser was about to do something, was that FGI?</p>
                <p>Kimball thought that FGI was not subject to any test except that it was FGI.</p>
                <p>Picker stated that no reason or explanation was needed. Like Japan, the damaging
                    of relations was implied, but there is no requirement to state so. The Japan
                    desk officer informed the subcommittee how U.S-Japanese relations would be
                    affected, but he made the point that he did not need to do so.</p>
                <pb n="31" xml:id="pg_31" facs="0031"/>
                <p>Rosenberg suggested that the definition of FGI must be narrowed.</p>
                <p>Kimball presented an example: the British Government states that all FGI about
                    the royal family must be excluded. Is the United States bound by the British
                    definition?</p>
                <p>Perkins did not see Kimball’s point.</p>
                <p>Kimball clarified his example: the British Ambassador told a U.S. diplomat about
                    a royal family member, such as Prince Charles’ love life, was this information
                    to be denied for 100 years, or for ever?</p>
                <p>McDonald suggested that the Committee should discover from ISOO [Interagency
                    Security Oversight Office] or the Department’s legal office what exactly is
                    FGI.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg stated that she wanted it as restricted as possible and did not want
                    special arrangements.</p>
                <p>Kimball responded that he agreed with Rosenberg.</p>
                <p>Nelson remarked that 1/3 to 1/2 of the withdrawal cards at the National Archives
                    are FGI. That was why it was such an important issue.</p>
                <p>Perkins reiterated that there should be some definition as to what “damaging
                    relations” means.</p>
                <p>Picker suggested that there must be an indication of what the damage would be.
                    That way the Committee can make an assessment.</p>
                <p>Perkins wondered if this was not a job for lawyers?</p>
                <pb n="32" xml:id="pg_32" facs="0032"/>
                <p>As a lawyer herself, Picker answered, “no.” Lawyers were only needed to draft,
                    you don’t want them making policy. The Committee’s job was to suggest the
                    policy.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if the Committee should state in its letter that the question of
                    FGI damaging relations should be raised? Could the concept be restricted?</p>
                <p>Rosenberg suggested that one compare the language of the FRUS law and the
                    PRD.</p>
                <p>Kimball read the language from the law:” demonstrably impede current diplomatic
                    negotiation or other on going official activities of the U.S.”</p>
                <p>Picker suggested using that language in the letter.</p>
                <p>Slany noted that President Bush explicitly rejected that language when he signed
                    the law.</p>
                <p>Kimball observed that Clinton has not done so.</p>
                <p>McDonald gave a short summary of recent CIA conferences and published materials.
                    He first talked about the symposium on teaching intelligence that Warren and
                    Emily participated in last month and then drew attention to the most recent CIA
                    publication of Soviet NIE’s from 1950-1959. These NIE’s, he clarified, did not
                    include estimates on soviet military capacity which the CIA plans to release at
                    a conference planned for next fall. Ken also informed the committee two other
                    conferences will take place next year: a conference on Harry Truman and the
                    founding of the CIA, March 17-18, 1994, and, a conference on images taken from
                    overhead reconnaissance satellites from years 1972-1973. This last conference,
                    Ken said, awaits final approval from Woolsey.</p>
                <pb n="33" xml:id="pg_33" facs="0033"/>
                <p>McDonald then addressed issues concerning the Foreign Relations Series. He said
                    that he had received from HO a list of the FRUS volumes that HO staff will work
                    on for the next two years and has assigned his staff accordingly to work with HO
                    historians.</p>
                <p>Schwar commented that although the CIA historians were extremely helpful, there
                    was still a problem with access to records of the operations directorate. It
                    appeared that the CIA historians themselves had incomplete access. MacDonald
                    stated that their access was complete.</p>
                <p>McDonald went on to say that HO access to CIA documentation for FRUS volumes is
                    unlimited as long as the documents are at least 26 years old. Declassification
                    of documents, however, he said, is limited. He reminded the committee that the
                    FRUS law permits the CIA to withhold declassification of its documents.</p>
                <p>McDonald mentioned that the CIA intends to publish a volume on the Rise and Fall
                    of Ngo Dinh Diem, by Tom Ahern, if it becomes declassified.</p>
                <p>He also said the CIA Historical Panel will probably reconvene in December or
                    January. Initially, this panel intended to meet every 2 or 3 years, but because
                    “things are moving faster now,” he said, the panel will likely meet more often
                    than before.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked why the 11 covert actions named by Woolsey were chosen for
                    declassification. Ken said that these 11 cases represented incidents of CIA
                    involvement which have elicited the most amount of public discussion and
                    comment. Ken went on to say that with the declassification of these 11 covert
                    action cases CIA employees would now be able to talk about these cases <pb
                        n="34" xml:id="pg_34" facs="0034"/> amongst themselves. He cited the example
                    of the National Reconnaissance Office (NRO) which previously could not be
                    mentioned publicly.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if the CIA considered itself responsible for questions concerning
                    foreign relations. He asked, “Isn’t that State’s responsibility?”</p>
                <p>McDonald said that the CIA worries about foreign intelligence liaison.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked again, whose responsible, and said that the committee did not want
                    double review of the same documents.</p>
                <p>McDonald said that CIA withholds information it thinks State will not release and
                    vice versa.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that this was unacceptable and to please relay this message to John
                    Pereira.</p>
                <p>Kimball then asked how the list of 11 cases could be expanded.</p>
                <p>McDonald said that the DCI decides what cases to declassify and that the CIA
                    cannot look at all categories of classified information for declassification
                    review. He emphasized that declassification of certain kinds of actions can lead
                    to sticky diplomatic problems, such as the one involving the Italian election in
                    1948 which has already elicited concern from the Italian government.</p>
                <p>Herring said that the list of 11 cases which will be reviewed systematically
                    should not preclude other FRUS cases from an appeal to be systematically
                    reviewed.</p>
                <pb n="35" xml:id="pg_35" facs="0035"/>
                <p>Picker asked Ken McDonald if the CIA could place priorities on FRUS volumes.</p>
                <p>Ken said that the CIA could not do that.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked if Woolsey had rejected any of their suggestions for these
                    particular covert actions to be declassified. Ken said none had, and that Tibet
                    had been added.</p>
                <p>Kimball then addressed the issue of CIA resources and support for FRUS volumes
                    given CIA’s other responsibilities. Kimball informed Ken that the committee was
                    concerned with the impending backlog of declassification that could bring FRUS
                    production to a halt in 1994.</p>
                <p>McDonald said that John Pereira’s declassification staff was committed to State’s
                    FRUS efforts, but that the declassification process is still very time
                    consuming, i.e. these classified documents must be reviewed line by line. He
                    emphasized the numerous tasks assigned to the Center for the Study of
                    Intelligence, including processing thousands of FOIA requests, declassifying JFK
                    assassination materials, etc.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that he thought the CIA considered State’s FRUS series to be one of
                    its priorities, just not its first priority.</p>
                <p>McDonald said “No, I wouldn’t say that,” rather the CIA was working fully in
                    accordance to the spirit and letter of the law. He added that the CIA is not a
                    huge reserve unit ready to take on new tasks.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that the CIA does have a lot of resources, and wanted to know where
                    FRUS fits into its organization.</p>
                <pb n="36" xml:id="pg_36" facs="0036"/>
                <p>McDonald emphasized that he did not think a problem exists with access to
                    documents (to which Kimball nodded in agreement). McDonald continued to say that
                    the declassification backlog was due more to issues concerning principles and
                    procedures than to a lack of resources. McDonald added that he thought the
                    bottleneck lay in policy, not in resources; and the bottom line was “they didn’t
                    want these documents to be released.”</p>
                <p>Nelson said that she would like the CIA and State to work together to make FRUS
                    integrate other agency materials, thereby retaining the integrity of the
                    series.</p>
                <p>McDonald said that its own initiatives to publish volumes on Guatemala in 1953
                    and on Iran in 1954 should not be misperceived as an attempt to overtake the
                    mission of the FRUS volumes.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked if the integrity of the records of the eleven cases would be
                    retained.</p>
                <p>McDonald said that CIA and NARA have a memorandum of understanding that these
                    records will be returned to their original record locations.</p>
                <p>Kimball added that even if HDR’s declassification team was functioning, it would
                    still be CIA practice to review documents twice. Warren suggested that this
                    practice should be changed, and the committee should talk to John Pereira to
                    find ways to declassify documentation that was “obviously innocuous.”</p>
                <pb n="37" xml:id="pg_37" facs="0037"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session-friday--november-5--11-10--noon_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session Friday, November 5, 11:10
                    -Noon</hi></head>
                <p>Ken Rossman distributed 15 copies of a 43-page inventory of Department of State
                    records. He said he had not been tasked to prepare the inventory despite the
                    request of the working group, about which he was unaware, and he and his staff
                    prepared it following his return to the Department on October 3. It covered
                    central, post, and lot files from 1800 to 1963. His estimate of the total number
                    of cubic feet was only .05 percent off from the actual total. The records
                    included 15,000 of 17,000 feet of temporary records.</p>
                <p>Kimball apologized for the Working Group not having formally tasked Rossman in a
                    timely manner; but went on to emphasize that INR records have not been apart of
                    the inventory universe, and that the Committee has been upset about this.</p>
                <p>Rossman indicated that he has dealt with a few INR projects, and is in the
                    process of transferring associated material. He claimed that since most of INR’s
                    records are heavily classified, space availability becomes a key issue. He hoped
                    the new classification center might help in this regard and that the records
                    would get out of the building and eventually to NARA.</p>
                <p>Kimball repeated that the Committee did not know if the inventory was complete,
                    and he wondered if there were other caches of records in the Department. Nelson
                    inter-jointed that a complete inventory would help the Committee in developing
                    its priorities for systematic review of the records. Kimball asked whether the
                    Committee was comfortable with this information.</p>
                <pb n="38" xml:id="pg_38" facs="0038"/>
                <p>Langbart said that he had to assume that Department offices are regularly moving
                    out their old records. The INR files were not “normal” files and thus were not
                    handled in a “normal” matter. Inventories could only be made of those records
                    retired, not those still in the operating bureaus.</p>
                <p>Kimball brought attention to the fact that the Committee’s past concerns have led
                    to progress with INR records, and asked if this did not suggest that similar
                    concern be aimed at other caches of records? He continued that it was his
                    understanding that such interest was the purpose behind the inventory.</p>
                <p>Rossman said he did not know whether there were more old records in the bureaus.
                    He noted that the Legal Adviser’s Office (L) had been “notorious” in holding
                    onto old records, but he had insisted that L identify records that were 30 years
                    old. He also said that the Department’s Records Service Center is filled 25%
                    beyond capacity. The Washington National Records Center at Suitland was also
                    overburdened.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if the Committee was agreed that this matter should be looked into,
                    and by lack of negative response assumed that it was agreed.</p>
                <p>Nelson offered that the more detailed description of lot files was useful.</p>
                <p>Rossman said that the inventory list would be put in an automated system and not
                    just remain a word processing document. He added that his office had removed the
                    exdis, limdis, and nodis captions from the documents and that they had retired
                    twice as many post files in fiscal year 1993 as in 1991 and 1992.</p>
                <p>Kimball thanked Rossman for his report.</p>
                <pb n="39" xml:id="pg_39" facs="0039"/>
                <p>He then asked the Committee how they wanted to proceed with the CIA. He related
                    that Slany believes now is a good time to send out a letter, and that’ it should
                    be first directed at Christopher, not Woolsey. With the Committee’s concurrence,
                    Herring would be drafting a letter on this subject.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg asked Herring if he intended to cover all three points that had been
                    discussed. Herring said the letter should focus on the Committee’s main
                    complaints, especially the backlog of <hi rend="underline">Foreign
                        Relations</hi> manuscripts which still needed to be reviewed for
                    declassification. Kimball thought that the problem of CIA’s double review (in
                    John Pereira’s office as well as referrals to the directorates) could be
                    mentioned as well as the existence of a problem of resources in Pereira’s staff,
                    according to the CIA people with whom the Committee has talked. Nelson
                    commented, however, that the letter did not have to mention these things, and
                    Herring agreed that these problems were CIA’s and that they should already be
                    aware of them.</p>
                <p>Rosenberg asked if Kimball intended to allow for comments from the staff?</p>
                <p>Kimball asked for comments from the HO staff.</p>
                <p>Sampson reported that the “good news” was that the two volumes on the Soviet
                    Union for 1961-1963 were cleared with no deletions. This was the first time that
                    had happened.</p>
                <p>Keefer then turned to the “bad news.” He echoed Schwar’s concerns over access to
                    CIA materials. The historians are simply not finding what they would expect to.
                    It was pointed out that while McCone’s DCI files were comparatively better, they
                    were largely policy oriented, not operational. It was <pb n="40" xml:id="pg_40"
                        facs="0040"/> difficult to know how much of the relevant record the HO
                    historians were really seeing; it was like “feeling an elephant blind.”</p>
                <p>Luke Smith remarked that good CIA documents are in the Presidential libraries.
                    Perhaps the historians could see whether the same documents were also in the CIA
                    materials, but Herring said the documents at the libraries were the CIA output,
                    and the historians wanted to know the CIA input into the creation of these
                    documents.</p>
                <p>Keefer cited the McCone papers as valuable but said they revealed more about his
                    relationships with other foreign policy principals than CIA policy. HO
                    historians had to rely on the trust of Ken McDonald rather than the CIA policy
                    people. The CIA’s filing system was deficient, and he feared that the CIA may
                    have discarded files after its people wrote histories of certain classified
                    operations. HO historians were allowed to see these histories, some of which
                    were good, some bad. Kimball wondered how the HO historians should treat these
                    histories. He thought that the INR files might help. Keefer thought it was
                    unrealistic to believe that HO historians will get a lot more on intelligence
                    matters.</p>
                <p>Nelson inquired whether the CIA histories were based at all on interviews, and
                    Keefer answered affirmatively. Herring asked whether the HO historians were
                    aware of the oral histories at Georgetown University. Schwar said these
                    interviews were well known but that frankly HO did not have time to consult
                    them, and Claussen commented that these interviews were done long after the
                    events. Herring thought that the interviewers may not have known what questions
                    to ask.</p>
                <pb n="41" xml:id="pg_41" facs="0041"/>
                <p>Picker asked whether the sensitive CIA records may have been “dumped.” Keefer
                    replied that a problem was that the agency was not interested in record keeping,
                    but Langbart countered that “the DI has always had record keeping.” Keefer
                    remarked that except for McCone the DCIs did not keep records. Schwar believed
                    that access at CIA is “one thousand per cent better now than two to three years
                    ago.” HO’s access is better for 1964-1968 materials than it was for 1961-1963.
                    Nelson noted that the CIA does not create finding aids.</p>
                <p>Jim Miller reported that the first 1964-1968 volume on Greece, Turkey, and Cyprus
                    is in the last stages of declassification at HDR. Six documents have been
                    excised or denied (he did not yet know which), and he worried whether the denied
                    material covered discussions concerning a particular mattter.</p>
                <p>When Schwar emphasized that HO’s resources were stretched thin, Kimball reported
                    that he had talked to McCurry about this the previous evening. LaFantasie said
                    he had heard that some HO positions had just been posted, and Geyer confirmed
                    that he had seen the postings. Slany added that HO just has to stretch more.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked whether research projects got in the way of the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series, and Slany responded that HO
                    was “not beaten to death” with them. In any case, HO could not ignore Secretary
                    Christopher when he asked HO for research support. Slany continued that McCurry
                    and Freeman would protect HO if the requests became burdensome. The most recent
                    request concerned upcoming European anniversaries. Kimball said that the
                    Committee was concerned with the stretching of HO’s thin resources.</p>
                <pb n="42" xml:id="pg_42" facs="0042"/>
                <p>Kimball concluded the session by mentioning a letter he had sent to President
                    Clinton as SHAFR president concerning the proposed Executive Order. Committee
                    members had copies of the President’s response, a real “downer,” which was
                    probably written in the NSC.</p>
                <p>The Committee adjourned for lunch at 11:50 a.m.</p>
                <pb n="43" xml:id="pg_43" facs="0043"/>
                <p>Compiled by: PA/HO-STTaylor</p>
                <p>12/8/93 ext. 31125</p>
                <p>Clearances:</p>
                <p>PA/HO : WZSlanyors</p>
                <p>IM/FPC/HDR: JHChaddic (cleared-7/18/94)</p>
                <p>ARA/CAR: LPeters (draft)</p>
                <p>EAP/J: JDinger (draft)</p>
                <p>PC DOC: HACNOV93 (HAC #1)</p>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
