<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1993-08-05">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, August
                    1993</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1993</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1993-08-05">August 05, 1993</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <body>
            <pb n="1" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section"
                xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation-august-5-1993_1">
                <head>ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTATION AUGUST 5,
                    1993</head>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Committee Members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Warren F. Kimball, Chairman</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Anna K. Nelson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Bradford Perkins</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Arnold H. Taylor</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Anne H. Van Camp</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Bennett Freeman</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Susan Povenmire</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Office of The Historian</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>William Z. Slany, Historian</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Glenn W. LaFantasie</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Rita M. Baker</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>M. Paul Claussen</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>W. Taylor Fain</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Vicki E. Futscher</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Evans Gerakas</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Nina Howland</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David C. Humphrey</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>James E. Miller</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David S. Patterson</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Harriet D. Schwar</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeffrey A. Soukup</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Shirley T. Taylor</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Carolyn B. Yee</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Joe H. Chaddic, Director, IM/FPC/HDR</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>William C. Hamilton, HDR</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeanne Pryor, HDR</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>John R. Hancock, Chief, Information Security Division</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">National Archives and Records Administration (NARA)</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Jeanne Schauble, Director, Records Declassification Division</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>David A. Langbart, Archivist, Records Appraisal and Disposition
                            Division</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Central Intelligence Agency</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>J. Kenneth McDonald, Chief Historian, CIA</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>Mary McAuliffe, Deputy Historian</p></item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="underline">Public</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>Page Putnam Miller, Director, National Coordinating Committee for
                            Promotion of History</p></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0002"/>
                <p><hi rend="underline"><hi rend="bold">TABLE OF CONTENTS</hi></hi></p>
                <table cols="3">
                    <row>
                        <cell>1.</cell>
                        <cell>Open Session, August 5, 9-10:45 A.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Discussion of The May Notes</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_3">3</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Report by the Historian on the Status of the Foreign Relations series,
                            and the New Declassification Unit</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_3">3</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Subcommittee Report on the Department’s 30-Year Old and Older
                            Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_6">6</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>2.</cell>
                        <cell>Open Session, August 5, 11:05-11:45 A.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>John R. Hancock, Report on Presidential Review Directive
                            (PRD-29)</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_7">7</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>3.</cell>
                        <cell>Luncheon Session, August 5, 12:15-1:30 P.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Meeting With Bennett Freeman</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_11">11</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>4.</cell>
                        <cell>Closed Session, August 5, 1:42-3:50 P.M.</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Subcommittee Report on State Access to DoD Files</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_12">12</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>J. Kenneth McDonald, Report on CIA Publication and Declassification
                            Activities</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_14">14</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Subcommittee Report on the New Editorial Policy and Practices
                            (1964-68, Vol. XI, Arms Control)</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_16">16</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Comments on the Working Group’s Action Plan for Opening the
                            Department’s Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_17">17</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>5.</cell>
                        <cell>Memorandum for the Record</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>Prepared by Committee Member Anna K. Nelson August 6, 1993 in response
                            to Committee’s discussion on the Working Group’s Action Plan</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_21">21</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
                <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0003"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--august-5--1993--9-08---10-45-a-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, August 5, 1993, 9:08 - 10:45
                    A.M.</hi></head>
                <p>Committee Chairman Warren Kimball called the meeting to order at 9:08 a.m. and
                    asked for approval of the draft minutes. Department Historian and Executive
                    Secretary of the Committee William Z. Slany said he had classified
                    correspondence bearing on the draft minutes which he would bring to the closed
                    session in the afternoon. Kimball said the correspondence was from a participant
                    at the last meeting who thought a portion of the minutes should be classified.
                    He stated that he objected to having any of the minutes classified, although he
                    did not object to adding notes to the minutes to enable participants to clarify
                    their statements. Director of Historical Documents Review Joe H. Chaddic noted
                    that he had not seen the draft minutes.</p>
                <p>Kimball stated that Deputy Assistant Secretary Bennett Freeman would be joining
                    the committee for lunch, and that he planned to adjourn at 11:45 a.m. so that
                    the committee could go over topics they would discuss at lunch.</p>
                <p>Slany presented the Historian’s report. He stated that the series is on schedule
                    in terms of publishing and accelerating publication to a 30-year line by 1996.
                    HO will publish 14 volumes this year and nearly 20 next year. HO is spending all
                    the funds available to it for publication in this fiscal year.</p>
                <p>He stated that a major achievement has been the creation of a declassification
                    unit within HO to handle liaison with other agencies and foreign governments in
                    the declassification process. Four positions for the new division have been
                    posted; in the meantime, David Herschler and Jeff Soukup have been detailed.
                    Nelson asked whether the positions for the new division represented a diversion
                    of resources from the compilation of the series. Slany said they did not; three
                    positions had come from the A Bureau. On the subject of declassification, he
                    noted that the Soviet volume for 1961-1963 had gone through the clearance
                    process with no material removed--an historic first.</p>
                <p>Slany reported that there had been a number of staff changes since the last
                    meeting. Two historians have left or are about to leave; Nina J. Noring has
                    retired and Taylor Fain is leaving to pursue an advanced degree. A senior
                    technical editor, Althea Robinson, retired, and the Deputy Historian’s secretary
                    moved to another office. PA has agreed to fill all vacancies. It is not clear
                    how many historian positions can be filled from outside the Department, although
                    Assistant Secretary Donilon supports doing so. Kimball noted that he had written
                    to Donilon reiterating the committee’s concern about HO <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4"
                        facs="0004"/> staffing and urging that HO needed to be able to recruit from
                    outside the Department. Slany stated that the new chief of the Asia and Americas
                    Division is Edward C. Keefer, and the new head of the Middle East, South Asia,
                    and Africa Division is Harriet D. Schwar. David Humphrey has arrived from the
                    Johnson Library to fill a previous vacancy.</p>
                <p>On the subject of access, Slany stated that HO is progressing in discussions with
                    Harry Middleton concerning the Johnson tapes. He noted that Ken McDonald would
                    be available later to discuss HO access to CIA materials. He stated that HO is
                    trying to work out an access arrangement with NSA. HO has requested access to
                    earlier material as well as material of the 1964-1968 period. He thought HO
                    would have an MOU with the JCS by the next Advisory Committee meeting.</p>
                <p>Bradford Perkins questioned the declassification backlog at some referral
                    agencies, noting that some of the 1961-1963 volumes were behind schedule as well
                    as some earlier volumes which have been in clearance for years. Slany thought
                    HO’s assumption of responsibility for liaison with other agencies would speed up
                    the process. He observed that the new division had only recently begun to
                    address the long-standing problems to which Perkins had referred. He noted that
                    Donilon had agreed to weigh in with other agencies if necessary. Perkins asked
                    about the time required between final clearance of a volume and its publication.
                    He asked if that was due to GPO. Rita Baker stated that it was partly due to GPO
                    and partly to the workload of the HO technical editors.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked whether the problem concerning physical aspects of security which
                    Slany had mentioned at the last meeting was interfering with HO’s work. General
                    Editor Glenn W. LaFantasie said it was a relatively minor problem. HO is
                    awaiting DS action on an arrangement which would simplify procedures. Kimball
                    stated that HO should let the committee know if the problem interfered with work
                    on the series.</p>
                <p>Has any progress been made in getting an MOU with the Defense Department, asked
                    Kimball? Anna Nelson said Brian Kinney, Chief of the Declassification and
                    Historical Research Branch at Defense, had met with the subcommittee on HO
                    access to DOD records the day before and had stated that Defense would agree to
                    an MOU although they still thought it was unnecessary.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked whether conflict between HO researchers and private researchers at
                    presidential libraries was a problem. He noted that John Fawcett had mentioned
                    this at the last <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0005"/> meeting as a hypothetical
                    problem. LaFantasie said HO had a detailed schedule of presidential library
                    visits. The Johnson Library was informed well in advance of HO research trips.
                    David Humphrey stated that this had not been a problem at the library.</p>
                <p>In a question raised by Kimball about the disposition of Advisory Committee
                    records, Slany stated that HO would send them to NARA after an appropriate
                    period of time.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if HO was keeping presidential libraries informed of
                    declassification decisions. Slany stated that HO was developing a database that
                    it would share with presidential libraries. Nelson asked about declassification
                    of classified material in private collections such as the Harriman Papers at the
                    Library of Congress. There was agreement that efforts should be made to keep the
                    curators of such collections informed about declassification of those
                    materials.</p>
                <p>The Tibet issue was raised by Kimball, and LaFantasie replied that HO has not
                    received a reply from the China desk or from CIA. Jeanne Pryor stated that a new
                    country director had just taken over, and that the Foreign Service officer who
                    met with the subcommittee at the last meeting was planning to discuss it with
                    him. She expected to have a memorandum from the desk by the end of August.</p>
                <p>The subject of the MOU between HO and HDR concerning the transfer of the
                    coordination of the FRUS declassification process from HDR to HO was raised by
                    Kimball. Perkins questioned why HO should clear with HDR its referrals of
                    documents to foreign governments for clearance. It was pointed out that the
                    Department might make a determination either to withhold or release a document;
                    in either case, it should not be referred to a foreign government. LaFantasie
                    explained that HO envisioned that referrals to other agencies and foreign
                    governments would occur at the same time the manuscript was sent to HDR; thus HO
                    would be making referrals before receiving the results of HDR’s review. For this
                    reason, it was necessary to clear the referrals with HDR, which would clear with
                    the regional Bureaus.</p>
                <p>Attention was directed to the draft guidance on determination of equities. In the
                    section on DOD equity, Kimball thought provision assigning DOD equity to all
                    documents with information on military plans and operations was too vague. He
                    thought a discussion between the President and the Secretary of State, with no
                    Defense representative present, concerning the possible use of force should not
                    have to be sent to DOD for clearance. LaFantasie pointed out that “hypothetical
                    plans and operations contained in a non-Defense document without Defense input”
                    were specifically exempted.</p>
                <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6" facs="0006"/>
                <p>Nelson asked whether the draft guidance represented any change. She thought it
                    was important that in assuming this new responsibility, HO should not bend over
                    backwards and interpret other-agency equities too broadly. She asked about the
                    assignment of CIA equity to every document identifying CIA personnel, even as
                    non-speaking participants in a meeting. If Richard Bissell, whose role in the
                    CIA is well-known, attended a meeting without saying anything, does the CIA have
                    equity and can it excise Bissell’s name? LaFantasie noted that it was important
                    to distinguish between the question of equities and questions of
                    declassification.</p>
                <p>Expressing concern about the definition of foreign government equity and foreign
                    government information (FGI), Kimball thought the draft guidance was too broad
                    and vague on this point. He argued that U.S. memoranda of conversation with
                    foreign officials should not be withheld because of FGI and that there should
                    not be any foreign government equity in such documents. Nelson noted that FGI
                    had never been an issue until the promulgation of Executive order 12065 during
                    the Carter administration. There was general discussion of the problem of FGI in
                    U.S. documents. David Patterson stated that only documents with high-level
                    foreign involvement required referral under the guidance. Chaddic stated that
                    HDR’s treatment of FGI depended on the substance of the discussion, but Jeanne
                    Pryor pointed out that FRUS documents were by definition substantive. Nelson
                    expressed concern about the last paragraph of the section on NSC equities.
                    Kimball stated that the committee was not entirely happy with the draft
                    guidance, especially the section on foreign government equity, and proposed that
                    a subcommittee should look further into the subject. The committee was in
                    general agreement with this.</p>
                <p>The report of the subcommittee on the Department’s 30-year-old records was
                    presented by Warren Kimball. Kimball, Arnold Taylor, and Perkins, substituting
                    for Emily Rosenberg, visited the National Records Center in Suitland the
                    previous day to observe the implementation of the Department’s plan to speed up
                    declassification. Kimball observed the work of the NARA declassifiers on
                    pre-1960 records; Perkins and Taylor looked at the work of HDR declassifiers on
                    1960-1963 records. To some: extent, their comments reflected this division of
                    labor.</p>
                <p>Kimball stated that all three were concerned that neither the NARA nor the HDR
                    declassifiers seemed to understand the Privacy Act. One of the tasks of the
                    declassifiers is to determine when documents are protected by the Privacy Act;
                    documents marked “P” for Privacy Act are closed for 100 years. He stated that
                    some documents concerning foreign nationals have <pb n="7" xml:id="pg_7"
                        facs="0007"/> been marked “P”, although the Privacy Act protects only U.S.
                    citizens. He thought some documents marked “P” had been so marked because they
                    contained information that might be embarrassing; this is not a valid reason for
                    keeping documents closed.</p>
                <p>Perkins stated that he had seen biographical materials on foreign leaders which
                    were marked for CIA review, even though they were not on CIA letterhead and
                    contained no references to sources and methods. William Hamilton stated that the
                    CIA had responsibility for all government-produced bios (except those prepared
                    by FSO’s) under an inter-agency agreement of some ten years ago. Kimball asked
                    if there were other such “secret agreements.” Chaddic and Hamilton thought not.
                    Perkins thought the bios would be useful to scholars although not to FRUS. There
                    was general agreement that this issue should be explored.</p>
                <p>Kimball was concerned about withdrawal sheets in the NARA records indicating that
                    some documents had been returned to INR. Chaddic stated that this was a question
                    of compartmentalized information. Some documents in the central files and lot
                    files are not supposed to be there. He stated that NARA is negotiating with INR
                    concerning the transfer of INR records to NARA. In order to do this, INR must be
                    convinced that NARA will take all necessary precautions to safeguard the
                    documents for which INR has responsibility. David Langbart of NARA stated that
                    the documents have not been returned to INR but remain in NARA custody in an
                    appropriate storage area. When and if they are declassified, they will be
                    returned to the files. He thought the integrity of the files would be preserved
                    if the agreed procedures are followed.</p>
                <p>The committee recessed for a coffee break at 10:45 a.m.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session--august-5--1993--11-05---11-45-p-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Open Session, August 5, 1993, 11:05 - 11:45
                    P.M.</hi></head>
                <p>After a coffee break, the Historical Advisory Committee reconvened at 11:05 a.m.
                    to receive a briefing from John Hancock, Chief of the Information Security
                    Division, Bureau of Diplomatic Security, Department of State, on Presidential
                    Review Directive (PRD-29). Hancock explained that he, as the State Department
                    representative on the PRD-29 task force, would give an account of the origins of
                    the task force, how it was organized, and its work to date. At the first meeting
                    of the task force, he was assigned to chair a committee on duration, one of
                    seven committees, to study the question of classification duration of government
                    records. PRD-29 was issued in early April 1993. Its purpose was to revisit and
                        <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0008"/> redraft Executive Order 12356 to deal
                    with classified material in the post-Cold War era. Questions for study would
                    include classifying only truly sensitive material and to ask, among other
                    things, whether existing classification categories and controls were still
                    needed.</p>
                <p>President Clinton appointed Steve Garfinckle, Director of the Information
                    Security Oversight Office (ISOO), as chair of the PRD Task Force. Garfinckle put
                    together a list of 21 government agencies and offices that were to comprise the
                    task force. The task force held its first meeting in mid-May. The 20-30 people
                    represented were broken into committees to look at specific parts of the
                    existing executive order. Garfinckle himself raised the above questions for
                    study in his instructions to the task force. The seven committees were
                    classification standards, excessive classification, duration, access,
                    declassification, oversight, and safeguards. Hancock repeated that he was
                    assigned to the duration committee, along with representatives of the Federal
                    Emergency Relief Agency, Navy, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission. Jim
                    Sandlin of DS/PRD is the alternate State representative to the task force. Each
                    committee was to proceed independently.</p>
                <p>For the committee on duration, phase 1 involved the development of a definition
                    of the committee’s scope and mission. Phase 2 dealt with data gathering both
                    outside and inside the government arena. The members gathered a lot of
                    literature. They also conducted preliminary interviews with the National
                    Coordinating Committee for the Promotion of History (Page Miller), American
                    Civil Liberties Union (Keith Martin), National Security Archives (Tom Blanton),
                    American Federation of Scientists, National Security Studies, and industry
                    representatives. They also talked to former Director of Central Intelligence Bob
                    Gates and government representatives at the Central Intelligence Agency. Hancock
                    regretted that he had not earlier talked to the Historical Advisory Committee
                    (HAC). He thought the HAC had already completed its work based on the initial
                    timetable established, and added that it was not too late for the Committee to
                    have some input in the process. The duration committee specifically considered
                    whether to have an automatic declassification date for some kinds of documents
                    or continue the line-by-line review.</p>
                <p>July 2 was the target date for committees to submit recommendations to
                    Garfinckle. In July, ISOO took the seven committee recommendations and developed
                    a new executive order. It was not an easy task to mesh the ideas of all the
                    committees, but a draft was completed by July 31 and submitted, at his request,
                    to the National Security Council for review. The NSC is now looking at it.
                    Hancock remarked that he had not yet seen this draft.</p>
                <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0009"/>
                <p>Nelson confirmed that Garfinckle (ISOO) put together this draft, which was the
                    only one the NSC has before it. Hancock noted that the principal person
                    responsible for the NSC review is George Bennett, Deputy National Security
                    Adviser for Intelligence.</p>
                <p>Hancock reemphasized Garfinckle’s direction to the committees to be imaginative
                    and creative. The duration committee addressed the duration issue mainly as
                    follows.</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1. Originating agency determination required (OADR). For example, should
                            the new executive order abolish OADR as a classification device and
                            instead have automatic declassification for certain kinds of information
                            in certain categories? If there was an exception to automatic
                            declassification, then specific reasons would have to be submitted to
                            the NSC.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2. Exceptions such as technology, cryptology, and certain specified
                            sources and methods would be identified, and target; dates, say 10, 15,
                            or 20 years; would be set for systematic declassification review.
                            Declassification would not be automatic. Review would occur at the end
                            of this time, however, and such documents would no longer have to wait
                            30 or 50 years.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3. All documents not falling under 1 or 2 would be automatically
                            declassified in three years.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>In the ensuing discussion, Perkins asked who was to define the categories.
                    Hancock responded that it would need to be at a senior level within the
                    Department. Perkins also expressed concern about Garfinckle’s instructions to
                    the task force, which had been discussed at the previous Committee meeting. He
                    felt they encouraged the tightening of restrictions on documents rather than a
                    spirit of openness, but Hancock disagreed.</p>
                <p>Nelson and Kimball said these proposals sounded something like the Carter
                    administration years when some documents could be automatically declassified
                    after 10 years, but the officers had the classifiers put down the maximum time
                    before required review. Perkins referred to the “stupid idea” of reclassifying
                    already released documents during the Reagan years, and noted that the Hancock
                    committee seemed to be going in the opposite direction. Hancock remarked that
                    his committee interpreted its instructions to move in a “radical” way toward
                    “more openness.” These were Garfinckle’s instructions to the committees, and
                    that the same tone of instructions was stemming from the President and the
                    NSC.</p>
                <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0010"/>
                <p>Kimball asked Hancock whether his committee had benefited from the experience of
                    HO historians, HDR reviewers, and senior NARA declassification people, who have
                    had hands-on experience in the field. Hancock replied affirmatively, noting that
                    he and his staff as well as the committee had met with such representatives. The
                    DS plan was progressing in two phases: discussing how information was presently
                    safeguarded and whether the controls were sufficient, and 2) reexamining the
                    memoranda of understanding (MOUs) between State and the other agencies on how to
                    treat documents, especially Top Secret documents. He is presently preparing a
                    draft response to the second issue. The problem is not the protection of State
                    Department documents but of other agency documents. Kimball rejoined that his
                    concern was not just MOUs or physical controls but historians’ experience in
                    handling classified documents. Hancock said that the duration committee talked
                    with Mr. Chaddic and others, and added that he was concerned not so much with
                    physical security but information security, especially classification
                    assignment. Nelson said that the path of the duration committee crossed with
                    that of the declassification committee. Jean Schauble noted that Mike Kurtz
                    chaired the declassification committee.</p>
                <p>Hancock continued by saying that the Information Security Division in the State
                    Department was focusing more on classification assignments rather than physical
                    security controls. He believed that within the State Department, the great
                    majority of documents should be unclassified. Guidance on classification is
                    lacking in the Department, but his office has been studying the problem. He
                    asked, for example, what should be classified? He has initiated a State
                    Department task force to determine what subject areas are and are not sensitive.
                    For example, can Limited Official Use (LOU) be used in the area of foreign
                    economic policy? An action memorandum on a sensitive put unclassified program is
                    currently being staffed.</p>
                <p>Slany asked Hancock whether he could comment on reports in the newspapers that
                    Congress would terminate ISOO at the end of this fiscal year. Hancock confirmed
                    such proposals and that Senator Moynihan has proposed a secrecy commission to
                    oversee all the task forces and committees looking at National Security issues.
                    To a question from Perkins, Hancock commented that the money for the commission
                    was proposed to come from the Department of State budget. He thought this would
                    be a duplicative effort, and believed that at least the executive order should
                    be issued first. We would have to see whether the Moynihan initiative is
                    included in the appropriations bill.</p>
                <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0011"/>
                <p>Nelson thought that declassifiers did not seem to care whether documents were not
                    declassified for 30-40 years. Hancock said the declassification committee might
                    be addressing this question.</p>
                <p>Kimball then asked, “How can the Historical Advisory Committee play a
                    constructive role?” Hancock responded that the executive order was just a draft,
                    and, in his opinion, the NSC will think the proposed changes are a healthy
                    development. The NSC would be looking at it this week. ISOO had massaged it, and
                    he hoped to see the NSC product very soon. Nelson noted that “the NSC” really
                    meant a staff adviser at the NSC. She wanted to know whether the National
                    Security Adviser was interested in the issue. Hancock stated that he was not
                    aware if the National Security Adviser was involved in the issue but that a Mr.
                    Podesta at the White House was interested in it. Nelson commented that the
                    Advisory Committee should have some input if the draft was not classified.</p>
                <p>Kimball suggested that Slany should stay in touch with Hancock so that the
                    Committee would “not miss the train this time.” Hancock added that there will
                    probably be several drafts of the executive order. Kimball continued that the
                    Committee’s interest in the executive order as well as that of several
                    professional, scholarly organizations should be made known to the drafters.</p>
                <p>Page Miller commented that she has spent a lot of time on this issue, and she
                    believed that the committee was developing more specific language and generally
                    was moving in “much more helpful ways.” She preferred to wait to see a draft
                    before HO moved on the question of vague definitions over what constitutes other
                    agencies’ equities.</p>
                <p>The Committee thanked Hancock as he left the meeting, and the committee adjourned
                    shortly before noon to hold a brief closed session before lunch.</p>
                <p>Bennett Freeman, Deputy Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Public Affairs, joined the
                    Advisory Committee during its lunch. Freeman said that Donilon regretted that he
                    was unable to attend the meeting or the luncheon. Mr. Freeman chatted with the
                    Committee for about 20 minutes, during which time his comments were focused on
                    the issue of PRD-29 and systematic declassification of the Department’s 30-year
                    old records. He listened to the Committee’s concerns, which included a critique
                    of the briefing it had heard from John Hancock of DS concerning the process by
                    which ISOO is going about drafting a new presidential executive order on
                    classification/ declassification. Mr. Freeman said that he would check on the
                    status of the draft and explore the possibilities of how <pb n="12"
                        xml:id="pg_12" facs="0012"/> the Department, and PA in particular, may play
                    a bigger role in the creation of a new executive order. He also said that the
                    declassification of 30-year old records was another priority concern of the
                    Bureau, and he told the committee he would call a meeting with interested
                    principals, to discuss congressional expectations and other matters concerning
                    the Department’s efforts to meet the statutory deadlines. Mr. Freeman also
                    assured the Committee that present vacancies, including two historians’
                    positions, would be filled as quickly as possible. He thanked the committee for
                    all its good work.</p>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session--august-5--1993--1-42---3-50-p-m-_1">
                <head><hi rend="underline">Closed Session, August 5, 1993, 1:42 - 3:50
                    P.M.</hi></head>
                <p>Chairman Kimball called the session to order at 1:42 p.m. As a preliminary, he
                    asked Chaddic to consult with NARA about adding information on withdrawal sheets
                    so researchers can have more information about the documents.</p>
                <p>Anne Van Camp began her report on the Van Camp-Nelson subcommittee by stating the
                    goal of their trip to the Records Center at Suitland: to observe the process of
                    the State historians’ access to DOD files. She explained the elaborate process:
                    the historian has to decide which files he/she wants to see and then order them
                    to be brought to the classified room.</p>
                <p>She believed they needed two things to streamline the process:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1) easier and better access to inventories/finding aids (Forms 135) --
                            possibly to have copies of these, and</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2) being allowed to photocopy documents at Suitland.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>The process now requires historians to fill out a form, have the whole box sent
                    to the Pentagon where the specific documents are pulled and copies made. The
                    process is very cumbersome. Making copies at Suitland would also protect the
                    records better<hi rend="bold">.</hi></p>
                <p>The DOD official who met with the subcommittee at Suitland, Brian Kinney, agreed
                    that this was a problem and was warned that the Department would be asking for
                    ways to streamline the process. He believed that no memorandum of understanding
                    on access was necessary because State historians have access to DOD records, but
                    he would draft one. He declined to meet with the Committee as a whole, but did
                    meet with the subcommittee on DOD records.</p>
                <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0013"/>
                <p>Van Camp clarified the process for Kimball: DOD makes a list of the documents the
                    State historian has requested, sends the list to originating agencies in order
                    to alert the agencies that State historians are looking at their documents.
                    Nelson said the major thing is to get a copying machine at Suitland. The main
                    problem is the DOD procedure, which is laborious.</p>
                <p>Schwar (who accompanied the subcommittee to Suitland) said that HO needs to have
                    copies of the finding aids (135s). It is not a problem of access but of
                    copying.</p>
                <p>Langbart asked if HO has asked DOD to copy the 135s for particular accession
                    numbers; the burden might as well be on DOD. Patterson and Schwar agreed.
                    Patterson also pointed out that the State historians would still have to go to
                    Suitland to identify accession numbers.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that this problem should be solved in the memorandum of
                    understanding with Defense. Schwar said that Kinney agreed that it would be
                    helpful if State historians could copy documents at Suitland.</p>
                <p>Langbart said the whole process came about because there were no copying
                    facilities at Suitland, but Van Camp noted that Kinney said that it was because
                    of accountability.</p>
                <p>Kimball repeated that the memorandum of understanding should negotiate specific
                    procedures and at a higher level than Brian Kinney.</p>
                <p>Patterson asked about the document lists. Van Camp and Nelson said that the State
                    historians cannot take the documents from Suitland, the documents must go to the
                    Pentagon where the lists are made. Van Camp pointed out that if the documents
                    don’t go back to the Pentagon, the State historians would have to make the
                    lists. Van Camp ended her report by saying that everyone at Suitland was helpful
                    and cooperative.</p>
                <p>Kimball repeated that the memorandum of understanding will make the process less
                    cumbersome for all.</p>
                <p>Before moving to the next agenda item, Kimball wanted the minutes to show that
                    Bennett Freeman at lunch had informed the Committee that the two historian
                    vacancies in HO would be filled. He wanted to express the Committee’s
                    appreciation for the support given to HO by the PA front office in personnel
                    staffing in order to meet the statutory requirements.</p>
                <pb n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0014"/>
                <p>Ken McDonald will now report on CIA publication and declassification
                    activities.</p>
                <p>McDonald began by saying that he had forwarded Kimball’s letter to the DCI with a
                    draft response. Kimball’s letter had noted how important CIA records were to the
                        <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series and the need for CIA and
                    PA/HO to continue to work together. If his draft was not changed, Kimball should
                    be receiving a friendly response.</p>
                <p>Kimball said McDonald and Slany would work out liaison for a long-term schedule
                    for research in CIA records. Then he asked McDonald about CIA/HO liaison about
                    the CIA publication program.</p>
                <p>McDonald said the History Staff would be publishing several publications in
                    conjunction with upcoming conferences:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- newly declassified non-strategic Soviet estimates (15-20 from the
                            1950s) for a Symposium on Teaching Intelligence, 1-2 October.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- strategic Soviet estimates -- already planned to accompany a
                            conference scheduled for autumn 1994.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- imagery and records from an early (1960s) overhead satellite
                            reconnaissance system, which is about to be transferred to the National
                            Air and Space Museum. These records will be declassified and some of
                            them possibly published for a conference.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- a book of documents on Truman and the origins of the CIA for a
                            conference here co-sponsored by CIA and the Truman Library in March
                            1994. These documents should not duplicate those selected for the
                            intelligence supplement prepared by Tom Thorne for the <hi
                                rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>McDonald said that CIA does not want to compete with the <hi rend="underline"
                        >Foreign Relations</hi> series, but the Center for the Study of Intelligence
                    has planned an active schedule of conferences, and expects to publish a volume
                    of newly declassified CIA records for each of these conferences.</p>
                <p>Kimball thought it was important that the CIA not duplicate documents in the <hi
                        rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi> series, but publish documents that
                    have been previously withheld. McDonald agreed that this would require CIA/HO
                    liaison.</p>
                <p>Nelson pointed out that if the CIA wanted to prove it was really open, it should
                    start answering FOIA requests. McDonald said that the responsibility for FOI is
                    in the Directorate for <pb n="15" xml:id="pg_15" facs="0015"/> Administration,
                    while the Center for the Study of Intelligence is in the Director’s office. The
                    same declassification guidelines will soon be used throughout the CIA.</p>
                <p>McDonald mentioned the list he had recently received from Slany and LaFantasie of
                    State historians’ visits to the CIA. Mary McAuliffe had returned a list of CIA
                    historians who would be their counterparts. The working relationship between the
                    two offices is excellent.</p>
                <p>McDonald then spoke of filling the gap in the published record, mentioning Iran
                    1953 and Guatemala 1954. On Guatemala, there are 272 archive boxes of materials
                    ready for declassification, gathered for an early FOIA request. A CIA history of
                    Guatemala has been written. He will discuss with Slany how to handle getting
                    these documents published. On Iran, the CIA History Staff gave some 1953
                    material to Nina Noring before she retired. Material on Iran is very difficult
                    to find in the Agency.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if the CIA history on Guatemala is classified. McDonald said yes,
                    but he hopes it will eventually be declassified. The DCI is beginning to open up
                    more subjects: Iran, Guatemala, the 1948 Italian elections.</p>
                <p>In response to a question from Perkins, McDonald clarified that the History Staff
                    arranges for access only; the John Pereira’s Historical Review Group (also in
                    the Center for the Study of Intelligence) declassifies documents.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie said that CIA should keep HO informed of topics that the DCI is
                    recognizing. Kimball spoke of the need for regular briefing meetings. McDonald
                    agreed to both.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked McDonald to pass on to Pereira some declassification issues:</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- Names of CIA officials who are participating in policy meetings. The
                            Committee was concerned that those names are arbitrarily
                        excised.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- Biographies of international officials. These will be appearing more
                            often, especially in briefing books, and should be
                        declassified.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- Why do all NIEs have to go back to the CIA for declassification? Is
                            there some way to declassify all NIEs before a certain date? McDonald
                            said that the NIEs on the Soviet Union are being reviewed and released,
                            but that there is no guarantee that the others would be as easy. There
                            is no <pb n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0016"/> decision to declassify all
                            NIEs and SNIEs, which are classic finished intelligence that go to all
                            policymakers. All references to sources and methods have already been
                            purged. Kimball finally asked if it was necessary for State to refer to
                            CIA State documents that provide input to NIEs.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- Are CIA documents “pre-sanitized” before they leave the Agency in a
                            routine attempt to remove sources and methods? McDonald said they are
                            not, simply because it would be too difficult to have two versions of
                            documents. Occasionally, however, some sensitive information is removed
                            from classified documents before they circulate outside of CIA. He cited
                            one example: in 1975 before CIA gave the Church Committee copies of
                            several classified History Staff histories, CIA (with the Church
                            Committee’s approval) deleted some names of sources. In any event, very
                            little “raw reporting” leaves the Agency.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>-- How do changes in the evolving CIA declassification policy get down to
                            the working level at NARA and other agencies? For example code-words
                            that are declassified.</p></item>
                </list>
                <p>McDonald said he would pass these concerns on to John Pereira.</p>
                <p>McDonald said that CIA’s Historical Review Group is occupied until August 22 with
                    reviewing JFK assassination materials, but that the Bay of Pigs, Iran, and
                    Guatemala materials are at the top of the list for declassification review.
                    Kimball said HO would be sending historians to CIA to look at the Iran records;
                    McDonald agreed -- that would be useful.</p>
                <p>Kimball thanked McDonald for coming to brief the Committee and for passing on its
                    concerns to Pereira.</p>
                <p>Arnold Taylor then reported on the Taylor/Nelson subcommittee evaluation of the
                    manuscript of <hi rend="underline">Foreign Relations</hi>, 1964-1968, Volume XI,
                    on Arms Control. The goal of the subcommittee was to evaluate the new editorial
                    policy to limit the number of documents printed and use editorial notes and
                    footnotes to ensure the record is covered.</p>
                <p>The subcommittee’s conclusion was that the completeness of the record was not
                    harmed or compromised by the new policy, in fact the General Editor had added
                    documents that the compilers had left out. The subcommittee was, however,
                    concerned by the compilers’ reliance on the Glenn T. Seaborg journal, which has
                    been published in a sanitized version in a few places, because the compilers had
                    not been able to find some documents.</p>
                <p>Although the subcommittee concluded that the new manuscript preparation
                    guidelines did not “do damage” to the completeness of the record for this
                    volume, it decided that this manuscript <pb n="17" xml:id="pg_17" facs="0017"/>
                    was not a good test of the guidelines. Nelson felt this was not a good test
                    because the issues are repetitive and arcane, so the omission of some documents
                    may not be damaging. She believed that the subcommittee should look at a
                    regional or bilateral volume.</p>
                <p>Kimball wondered if the new manuscript functioned as a finding aid or guide to
                    the files. LaFantasie pointed out that he hoped the editorial notes and
                    footnotes would work as finding aids. Slany agreed that a bilateral volume might
                    be a better test because it would involve many issues, some of which would have
                    to be left out.</p>
                <p>Perkins asked why the compilers could not find the documents.</p>
                <p>Patterson explained that the arms control material for the Johnson period was
                    very widespread, not like the 1950s where everything was in 2-3 lot files. The
                    Seaborg Journal was used for records of meetings only when no other records of
                    that meeting could be found.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked Nelson and Taylor to look at a bilateral volume and asked
                    LaFantasie to arrange the details with them.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked LaFantasie and Slany if there were any declassification problems
                    that they would like to bring before the Committee. They said they would have
                    some at the next meeting. Kimball said he would like to hear at the next meeting
                    about the Tibet documents, which by then the China desk officer would have had
                    time to review.</p>
                <p>Nelson wished to comment on the Action Plan for opening the Department’s 30-year
                    old and older records. She believed that the plan was not as detailed or as
                    precise as the Committee was led to believe at its last meeting. As written, the
                    plan would do the same thing only faster; the process was not spelled out to
                    make changes.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that the understanding within the Working Group was that the plan
                    would require a new attitude (Kimball quoted Chaddic as saying that he was
                    “willing to accept a higher risk in the declassification process”). Some levels
                    of review have also been eliminated.</p>
                <p>Nelson said that the process of page-by-page review was still being used; she
                    wants the Action Plan to spell out what’s going on.</p>
                <p>Kimball noted the problem of agreeing on the definition of terms such as “bulk”
                    declassification. The Action Plan cannot <pb n="18" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0018"/>
                    Kimball noted the problem of agreeing on the definition of terms such as “bulk”
                    declassification. The Action Plan cannot be too detailed, but a deadline has
                    been agreed to, no matter what the process.</p>
                <p>Nelson said she wants a more specific Action Plan and risk assessment procedure
                    in order to speed declassification. She was troubled by Assistant Secretary
                    Sherman’s letter that said the Working Group has made “bold, forward-looking
                    recommendations.” Why is this not reflected in the Action Plan?</p>
                <p>Kimball said that risk assessment must be preceded by a preliminary inventory,
                    which, according to the Action Plan, will be completed by September 1. This will
                    establish priorities to determine which records will be addressed first.</p>
                <p>Nelson thought that the Action Plan the Committee looked at at its last meeting
                    was a draft. Slany said that at that time, it was an internal Department of
                    State document, which was later adopted.</p>
                <p>Nelson said it was her understanding that the Committee had only tentatively
                    approved the Working Group report; it had not “endorsed” it. Perkins also noted
                    that Plan did not have a “drop-dead” date.</p>
                <p>Kimball pointed out that the report has gone to the Hill. Nelson was
                    uncomfortable that the Committee had signed off on something it will later
                    regret. No attempt was made to add a minority view. The Committee will be held
                    responsible for the Action Plan and this is going to be a “BIG problem.”</p>
                <p>Kimball pointed out that the letter does not take away the Committee’s rights and
                    responsibilities to monitor the implementation of the plan.</p>
                <p>Van Camp added that the Committee did endorse the Plan at its last meeting and
                    she did not understand Nelson’s concerns. The plan purports to achieve the goal
                    of opening the records and the Committee still has the option to monitor and
                    disagree.</p>
                <p>Nelson thought that the Committee’s concerns and questions with the Plan should
                    be made clear on paper and the Committee would carefully watch the
                    implementation.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that the drop-dead date was a major issue and the Working Group did
                    not vote for one; it was probably a violation of the law.</p>
                <p>Van Camp pointed out that Nelson should have expressed her minority views more
                    explicitly at the last meeting.</p>
                <pb n="19" xml:id="pg_19" facs="0019"/>
                <p>Nelson said she wants her concerns to be on record. She will be cautious in the
                    future to make sure that a paper is a draft or in final.</p>
                <p>Kimball again asked Nelson to spell out her concerns.</p>
                <p>Nelson repeated that the Working Group report does not change the procedure.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked what changes she wanted; what should the Committee have done?</p>
                <p>Nelson could only reply that she believed that the Committee should be
                    independent from the Department of State and should maintain its commitments to
                    its constituent societies.</p>
                <p>There was a discussion of “bulk declassification” and the difficulty of defining
                    it. Langbart provided the Archives definition: systematic survey of a
                    collection; if nothing sensitive is found, then the collection is declassified;
                    or files are identified that require page-by-page review.</p>
                <p>Kimball said that Frank Machak was not enthusiastic about bulk declassification
                    but has agreed and will give Chaddic a working definition. The Working Group had
                    agreed not to supply definitions because it might prove difficult to clear
                    within the Department. The Committee has to monitor the process.</p>
                <p>Nelson felt the lack of definitions was a loophole. Van Camp believed that the
                    Action Plan represented a major step forward and the Committee should give the
                    plan a chance to work. The Action Plan is clear and the Department has promised
                    to meet the deadlines it contains.</p>
                <p>Kimball agreed that the Committee would monitor progress at its next meeting.</p>
                <p>Chaddic reflected on how far this process has come from October 1992. Perkins was
                    impressed at the pace of declassification: 12 people are currently declassifying
                    10, 000 pages per day.</p>
                <p>Kimball delineated the priorities that Chaddic had set: the Central Files for
                    March through December 1963 (to be completed by September 30, 1993); the Berlin
                    Lot Files through the 1980s; and some Secretariat Lot Files (Cabinet meetings
                    1961-1963, Foreign Ministers Meetings 1940-1960, William Y. Elliott files).
                    Chaddic will consult with the Committee about new priorities.</p>
                <pb n="20" xml:id="pg_20" facs="0020"/>
                <p>Kimball passed on an inquiry from Emily Rosenberg regarding interagency risk
                    assessment teams. He believed that the issue was premature but the Committee
                    will ask Chaddic for a report at its next meeting. The teams represent an
                    important step and a major change in the procedures: declassification at the
                    working level.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if INR records are protected under the CIA Act. No one knew.</p>
                <p>Nelson asked about AID records. Chaddic responded that AID has its own
                    declassification office and reviewers. Nelson assumed that AID is not affected
                    by the 30-year rule; Kimball agreed. Patterson pointed out that AID has signed a
                    memorandum of understanding regarding access.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked if Roger Channel records were protected by the CIA Act. Chaddic
                    pointed out that Roger Channel was limited distribution to State Department
                    only.</p>
                <p>Kimball wanted to express his appreciation for the fact that HDR received
                    “earmarked” money for declassification. It was good to see the government put
                    its money where its mouth was.</p>
                <p>He then asked for old business. Schwar asked if INR had responded to the
                    questions raised about its records at the last meeting. Kimball said yes but not
                    very satisfactorily, and the Committee would take up the issue at its next
                    meeting. INR understands in principle that HO needs access to its records.</p>
                <p>Staff comments were requested. Patterson noted that DOD records were not subject
                    to systematic review. Kimball and Slany noted that PRD-29 may address that
                    issue.</p>
                <p>LaFantasie said that the Navy is basing its systematic declassification review on
                    State procedures. Langbart replied that Navy was only interested in Navy
                    material and did not flag other agencies’ equities. When the material was sent
                    to Archives it had to be re-reviewed, thereby making Navy’s review relatively
                    useless.</p>
                <p>The meeting adjourned at 3:50 p.m.</p>
                <pb n="21" xml:id="pg_21" facs="0021"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="memorandum-for-the-record_1">
                <head>Memorandum for the Record</head>
                <p>QUOTE: “As will be noted in the minutes of the August 5 meeting, I was somehwat
                    dismayed to read the letter sent by Asst. Sec. Sherman to Chairmen Pell and
                    Hamilton of the Senate and House Committees. In this letter, Sec. Sherman states
                    that the Advisory Committee “endorsed” the recommendations of the State
                    Department Working Group on reaching the 30 year declassification requirement.
                    My chagrin was based on the erroneous assumption that we were discussing a draft
                    of that document in our May meeting. I assumed we would see a final version.
                    Hence I was also very critical of the enclosed Action Plan which I assumed to be
                    the final report. I was told that I was the only one confused; that I should
                    have raised questions or filed a dissenting opinion in May; that we had no need
                    to receive the report sent to Congress because it was the one we had seen; and
                    that the HAC did “endorse” the plan.</p>
                <list>
                    <item>
                        <p>1. The report we received in May was marked “revised draft.” Thus, there
                            was every reason to believe we were discussing a draft and that before
                            that draft was sent to Congress we would have a chance to comment on it
                            in some way.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>2. If, indeed, there was no intention to further change the report then
                            the HAC wasted several hours discussing the draft. Although a
                            representative of the HAC attended the working group meetings, the
                            Committee as a whole had no input.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>3. Reading the minutes of the meeting in May, one hardly gets the
                            impression that the HAC “endorsed” the plan. In fact, the minutes do not
                            indicate that a conclusion was reached. As I recall, we did agree that
                            the working group should continue its efforts -- that is, we decided not
                            to withdraw from participating in the task before the working
                        group.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>4. But the minutes reveal the misgivings of individual members of the
                            HAC. There was general agreement that the State Department would not
                            meet the 30 year deadline under this plan. Several members noted that
                            (reflecting our organizations) we were committed to a “drop dead” date,
                            but that this plan did not anticipate any such alternative. It was
                            suggested that this plan mostly established the same process, only
                            faster. Others noted that the risk assessment plan was the only really
                            new recommendation. Questions were raised about the way the risk
                            assessment plan would work. Although the HAC would be involved in
                            helping with risk assessment, one member asked about the effect of the
                            disagreement over risk by the HAC member. Would it be honored in any
                            way? (There was no response).</p></item>
                    <pb n="22" xml:id="pg_22" facs="0022"/>
                    <item>
                        <p>5. The minutes also reveal that in this discussion, Kimball did note that
                            the report was in its final form, but that the HAC could and “should”
                            add its comments. However, in the press of business and perhaps because
                            the Chair did not believe it useful, no comments were prepared. Quite
                            frankly, I missed the significance of the fact that the report was in
                            its final form given the heading of the Working Group report. Otherwise
                            I would have either pressed for Committee comments or simply added my
                            own.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>6. Several times during the August 5 discussion, I was challenged to
                            state the reasons for my concerns, given the fact that the HAC is
                            supposed to monitor this plan. My basic concern is that in an effort to
                            avoid confrontation (an effort I generally support) the Committee will
                            lose its independence and compromise its function. We should not always
                            go along in order to get along. We have to fulfill our obligations under
                            the statute, represent our own organizations and preserve our own
                            integrity. In this instance, our ability to question the efficacy of the
                            Working Group plan has been seriously impaired because we are on record
                            “endorsing” the plan without additional caveats that reflect our
                            reservations.</p></item>
                    <item>
                        <p>7. There will no doubt be many instances in the future when individual
                            members of the HAC will have to represent the Committee in meetings and
                            private conversations. Each of us must feel free to state our own
                            opinions but are obligated also to reflect the opinions of other
                            Committee members. In this case, since the HAC did not want to
                            discourage the positive aspects of the Working Group plan, additional
                            comments from the HAC were in order to indicate various reservations and
                            avoid the assumption of total ‘endorsement’." END QUOTE</p></item>
                </list>
                <p rend="right">Anna K. Nelson, Member Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic
                    Documentation August 6, 1993</p>
                <pb n="23" xml:id="pg_23" facs="0023"/>
                <table style="TableGrid" cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell>Compiled by:</cell>
                        <cell>PA/HO-STTaylor</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>8/16/93</cell>
                        <cell>ext. 31125</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Clearances:</cell>
                        <cell>PA/HO: WZSlany</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>PA/HO: GWLaFantasie</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell/>
                        <cell>PA/HO: RMBaker</cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>PC DOC:</cell>
                        <cell>AUG93MIN (#HAC)</cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
