<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1994-10-27_minutes">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, October
                    1994</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1994</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1994-10-27">October 27, 1994</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front>
            <pb n="[i]" xml:id="pg_i" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section"
                xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation-october-27--1994_1">
                <head><hi rend="bold">ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON HISTORICAL DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTATION
                        October 27, 1994</hi></head>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Committee Members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Warren F. Kimball, Chairman</item>
                    <item>Benton V. Davis</item>
                    <item>George C. Herring</item>
                    <item>Melvyn P. Leffler</item>
                    <item>Anna K. Nelson</item>
                    <item>Jane M. Picker</item>
                    <item>Arnold H. Taylor</item>
                    <item>Ann H. Van Camp</item>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of the Historian</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Historian</item>
                    <item>Rita Baker</item>
                    <item>Paul Claussen</item>
                    <item>Mike Davis</item>
                    <item>Evan Duncan</item>
                    <item>Vicki Futscher</item>
                    <item>Karen Gatz</item>
                    <item>David Geyer</item>
                    <item>Deb Godfrey</item>
                    <item>David Herschler</item>
                    <item>Kerry Hite</item>
                    <item>Nina Howland</item>
                    <item>David Humphrey</item>
                    <item>Donna Hung</item>
                    <item>Ted Keefer</item>
                    <item>Harmon Kirby</item>
                    <item>Glenn LaFantasie</item>
                    <item>Daniel Lawler</item>
                    <item>Gabrielle Mallon</item>
                    <item>David Patterson</item>
                    <item>Harriet Schwar</item>
                    <item>Luke Smith</item>
                    <item>Shirley Taylor</item>
                    <item>Carolyn Yee</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Kenneth Loff, Managing Director, IM/IS</item>
                    <item>Edward B. Wilson, Director, IM/IS/OIS</item>
                    <item>Anthony Dalsimer, Director, FPC/HDR</item>
                    <item>Willie Gee, Jr., Acting Chief, IS/OIS/RA/RD</item>
                    <item>Betty Bates, IS/OIS/RA/RD</item>
                    <item>William Hamilton, FPC/HDR</item>
                    <item>Nina Noring, FPC/HDR</item>
                    <item>Jeanne Pryor, FPC/HDR</item>
                </list>
                <pb n="[ii]" xml:id="pg_ii" facs="0002"/>
                <p><hi rend="bold">National Archives and Records Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Michael Kurtz, Acting Assistant Archivist</item>
                    <item>George Chalou, Archivist, Records Appraisal Division</item>
                    <item>David Langbart, Archivist, Records Appraisal and Disposition
                        Division</item>
                    <item>Marvin Russell, Chief, General Archives Review Branch</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Private</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William Burr, National Security Archive</item>
                    <item>Lard Cossette, journalist, <hi rend="italic">Yomiuri Shimbun</hi></item>
                    <item>Page Putnam Miller, Director, National Coordinating Committee for the
                        Promotion of History</item>
                    <item>Toshiya Umehara, staff writer, <hi rend="italic">Asahi Shimbun</hi></item>
                    <item>Mary Beth Warner, news assistant, <hi rend="italic">Asahi
                        Shimbun</hi></item>
                    <item>Tim Weiner, journalist, <hi rend="italic">New York Times</hi></item>
                </list>
                <pb n="[iii]" xml:id="pg_iii" facs="0003"/>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="contents">
                <head>Table of Contents</head>
                <table cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell>Open Session</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_1">1</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Adoption of the Minutes of the February, May, and August
                            Meetings</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_1">1</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Amendment of the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> Law</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_1">1</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report by William Z. Slany, The Historian</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_2">2</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report on Access to Records at the Johnson Library</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_3">3</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Move of Department of State Files to Berryville, Virginia</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_4">4</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Department Response to the Japan Appeal</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_5">5</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on the Opening of the Department of State’s
                            30-Year Old Records at the National Archives</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_7">7</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Closed Session</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_7">7</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Discussion of Committee Minutes</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_8">8</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Schedule for Future Committee Meetings</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_8">8</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report by Michael Kurtz, Acting Assistant Archivist on
                            Declassification of Department of State Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_9">9</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Further Discussion of the Japan Appeal</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_10">10</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Further Discussion of the Move of Department of State Files to
                            Berryville</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_11">11</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Further Discussion of Declassification Guidelines</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_11">11</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_13">13</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> Coordinator in HDR</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_15">15</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report on the Visit to the Central Intelligence Agency</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_15">15</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>HO Staff Comments</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_16">16</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Annex 1: Arnold Taylor’s letter to Ann Van Camp</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Annex 2: Statement on Disposal of Department of State Records</cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                </table>
            </div>
        </front>
        <body>
            <pb n="[1]" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0004"/>
            <div xml:id="open-session">
                <head>Open Session</head>
                <p>Committee Chairman Warren Kimball called the meeting to order at 9 a.m.</p>
                <p>William Z. Slany reminded everyone that this was a public session and that
                    classified material should not be discussed during this part of the meeting.
                    Kimball stated that we need to bear in mind the difference between closed and
                    classified. He requested that anyone who wants to discuss classified material
                    during the closed part of the meeting should so state.</p>
                <div xml:id="adoption-of-the-minutes-of-the-february">
                    <head>Adoption of the Minutes of the February, May, and August Meetings</head>
                    <p>Kimball asked if anyone had any comments on the minutes of the February and
                        August meetings (he withdrew discussion of the May minutes until the closed
                        portion of the meeting). Jane Picker suggested that on p. 34 of the February
                        minutes, in the first complete paragraph, the second sentence should read:
                        “State raised as a problem the possible future cooperation of other
                        agencies.” Anna Nelson suggested that in line 3 of the first full paragraph
                        on p. 19, the reference should be to “an ISOO (1991) report” and that in the
                        first line of the first full paragraph on p. 48, “could” should be changed
                        to “would.” The changes were approved, and Kimball stated that the February
                        minutes were adopted.</p>
                    <p>Concerning the August minutes, Arnold Taylor requested an addition to a
                        paragraph on p. 6: “Taylor raised the issue of USIA material at the
                        University of Arkansas, and Langbart said they could discuss that at a later
                        time.” The change was approved, and Kimball stated that the August minutes
                        were adopted.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that all three sets of minutes would be available in the State
                        Department Reading Room on Friday. He noted unfamiliar faces and asked those
                        present to identify themselves. They were Tim Weiner of <hi rend="italic"
                            >The New York Times</hi> and two (a third entered the meeting later)
                        reporters from Japanese newspapers, <hi rend="italic">Asahi Shimbun</hi> and
                            <hi rend="italic">Yomiuri Shimbun.</hi></p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="amendment-of-the-foreign-relations-law">
                    <head>Amendment of the Foreign Relations Law</head>
                    <p>Kimball turned to the question of possible amendments to the 1991 <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> law. He had spoken to committee
                        staffers on the Hill, who supported the idea. First, he noted that there is
                        no other committee with a legislative mandate dealing with foreign policy
                        records, and he thought it was appropriate at this time to expand that
                        mandate. Second, he pointed out that the 26-year rule for access to records
                        was a problem with CIA. HO historians sometimes need to look at records less
                        than 26 years old. Now is the time to raise the issue.</p>
                    <p>Slany agreed, stating that since HO is compiling by administration, we need
                        access to be well within the 26-year line. Kimball thought the problem might
                        arise from confusion of declassification with compilation, but Page Miller
                        stated that the CIA had refused during the drafting of the statute to accept
                        less than a 26-year rule because of other legislative requirements.</p>
                    <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0005"/>
                    <p>David Herschler commented that the reference in the law to “originating
                        agency” concerning declassification requirements should be changed to
                        “originating/reviewing agencies.” In some cases, a reviewing agency that was
                        not the originating agency but had equity in the document has argued that
                        the time limit in the law did not apply to them.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that Congressional staffers he had talked to would like to have
                        the Committee’s suggestions in January when Congress convenes. He asked
                        Committee members to think about this and give him their suggestions. Jane
                        Picker could put them into legalese.</p>
                    <p>Kimball also emphasized that he thought the Committee should make a strong
                        statement supporting a new Executive Order.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-by-william-z-slany-the-historian">
                    <head>Report by William Z. Slany, The Historian</head>
                    <p>Kimball asked Slany for the Historian’s report. Slany, who had circulated to
                        the Committee a written report with 20 attachments in advance of the
                        meeting, stated that HO is eliminating the backlog of compiled volumes
                        awaiting declassification and publication. In the next year we will publish
                        20 volumes, and by the end of next year, we will have published 50 volumes
                        since the passage of the legislation. Now we need to concentrate our efforts
                        on completing the compilation off the volumes on the Johnson administration.
                        We are working on expanding the scope of the series while reducing the
                        volume of material published.</p>
                    <p>Half dozen senior Foreign Service officers (FSOs) have been assigned to HO.
                        They are reviewing manuscript and performing other duties associated with
                        the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series. Two of them are
                        scheduled to review the material at the Central Intelligence Agency on
                        Guatemala and Iran and make suggestions. We know there is a lot on
                        Guatemala, but only a little on Iran. He noted that the FSOs will not
                        compile the volumes; other members of the HO staff, who normally work on
                        technical editing and declassification, have been drafted to help with
                        compiling.</p>
                    <p>Melvyn Leffler questioned using FSOs to work on <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations.</hi> Slany pointed out that HO is not authorized to spend
                        money to bring in outside reviewers and these officers give us extra sets of
                        eyes to review manuscript. One FSO has looked at the Kennedy/Khrushchev
                        correspondence and suggested asking the Russian Foreign Ministry if our
                        collection of correspondence was complete. We are not obligated to take
                        their advice.</p>
                    <p>Kimball stated that his impression was that FSOs vary greatly in their views
                        on declassification; it is hard to generalize. Anna Nelson was concerned
                        that an FSO might say a document didn’t belong in a compilation because he
                        didn’t like it. Slany replied that they have no veto power. Picker asked if
                        the FSOs were assigned on the basis of their past experience. She also
                        expressed concern about their objectivity.</p>
                    <p>Slany stated that the officers are assigned on the basis of expertise. He
                        commented that they tend to want more, rather than fewer, documents. He
                        asked if the Committee wanted to have any contact with this group, but they
                        declined.</p>
                    <p>Kimball suggested that HO should send a shortened form of the list of <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes available at GPO to the
                        SHAFR newsletter.</p>
                    <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0006"/>
                    <p>Slany raised the matter of public access to the Committee’s records. He asked
                        if the Committee wanted to discuss what documents constituted its records.
                        HO has a list of the documents presently available in the State Department
                        Reading Room, and he asked if the Committee thought additional material
                        should be included. Should correspondence between HO and the Committee be
                        part of the public record? Kimball thought the correspondence was not that
                        voluminous and should be regarded as part of the public record.</p>
                    <p>Slany noted that HO did not have the correspondence exchanged between members
                        of the Committee. Jane Picker referred to E-Mail. Kimball replied that the
                        substance of the Committee’s E-Mail ended up in its discussions.</p>
                    <p>Nelson noted that the question of public access to the Committee’s records
                        was discussed in its charter and that the muddy area was that of the closed
                        meetings because of confusion between classified and closed. She thought a
                        procedure for these records should be established according to the
                        Committee’s mandate.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that people needed to feel free to discuss private or classified
                        material at these meetings. Nelson pointed out that participants were able
                        to see the minutes before they were approved.</p>
                    <p>George Chalou commented that the Committee needed to differentiate between
                        reading room material and permanent Committee records. Nelson emphasized
                        that the Committee should be as open as possible. David Langbart noted that
                        the schedule for disposition of the Committee’s records provided for
                        preservation of correspondence and related materials as well as the records
                        of the meetings.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that the principle was to open the records. Participants in the
                        closed meetings should specify if they were discussing classified material
                        or material that required protection for other reasons.</p>
                    <p>Slany noted that there was concern in the Department of State about
                        protection of the deliberative process. People in the Department had
                        objected to sharing internal documents with the Committee and did not want
                        everything they said to be part of the public record. Kimball said he would
                        remind people that they should tell the Committee if they wanted something
                        to be off the record. He noted that the Committee could always say no. The
                        records should be open unless the Committee had agreed that they were not
                        open.</p>
                    <p>Nelson wondered if this would affect whether people would share information
                        with the Committee. Slany pointed out that awareness of the Committee had
                        increased. In response to a question from Picker, Kimball replied that the
                        fullness of the minutes was not the problem. The Committee had been part of
                        the deliberative process with the Executive order and the State Department
                        was not happy with internal dissent being made public. Ann Van Camp stated
                        that the Department did not want in the public domain a version of the
                        Executive order that was not final.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-on-access-to-records-at-the-johnson-library">
                    <head>Report on Access to Records at the Johnson Library</head>
                    <p>David Humphrey presented a report on access to records at the Lyndon B.
                        Johnson Presidential Library. He said there were two issues. The first was
                        the two State Department-funded positions at the Library that were now
                        vacant. Filling these was <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4" facs="0007"/> crucial to
                        keeping things moving, and he noted that the Library was working on filling
                        them. Nelson asked if clearances were a problem. Humphrey said no. The
                        positions were funded on a year-by-year basis and many people did not want
                        to go to Texas for a temporary position. Nancy Smith noted that applicants
                        need to have clearances and experience and be willing to move without a
                        moving allowance. Nevertheless, several people were interested.</p>
                    <p>Humphrey said that the second issue was access to the tapes of the Johnson
                        telephone conversations. HO hopes to soon have tapes for conversations in
                        December 1966 and has requested tapes for 75 conversations in 1967. By the
                        next meeting, we should have a better idea of how fast the Library can
                        process the tapes and how much we will be able to integrate into the
                        volumes.</p>
                    <p>Nelson asked if all the documentary records were available to HO. Humphrey
                        replied yes; the problem was with the taped conversations. The Library is
                        still in the process of duplicating these onto digital-audio tapes. Nancy
                        Smith pointed out that the existing transcripts are not always accurate and
                        have to be checked against the tapes before publication. Some of the
                        transcripts are highly inaccurate. Humphrey also emphasized that the Library
                        did not want HO to publish transcripts without comparing them with the
                        tapes.</p>
                    <p>George Herring asked if the question of priorities had been resolved, and
                        Humphrey replied that it had. He noted that HO was submitting requests for
                        tapes for an entire month, such as December 1966. Herring asked if the
                        process was going well. Humphrey replied that it was too early to tell, but
                        the Library was being cooperative.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked if that meant there would be no problem meeting the 30-year
                        line. Humphrey said there was a potential problem but it was hard to be
                        precise at this stage; we should have a better idea of the situation by the
                        next meeting.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked if there had been a response to the letter to Acting Archivist
                        Trudy Peterson about moving NARA staff to short-term positions. Nancy Smith
                        said not yet. The problem was the need to assure staff members who move to
                        Austin of a permanent job after the project at Austin is completed.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="move-of-department-of-state-files-to-berryville-virginia">
                    <head>Move of Department of State Files to Berryville, Virginia</head>
                    <p>The Committee then turned to discussion of the projected move of the
                        Department of State Central Foreign Policy File. Ken Lpff, Managing Director
                        of Information Services (A/IM/IS), Edward Wilson, Director of the Office of
                        Information Services (A/IM/IS/OIS), and Willie Gee, Acting Chief of the
                        Records Management Branch (IS/OIS/RA/RD) briefed the Committee.</p>
                    <p>Loff explained that the site was at Mount Weather, where there is a large
                        FEMA installation that is being converted for various purposes. He noted
                        that the lease at PG Plaza was currently on a month-by-month basis, DS is
                        concerned about security problems there, the facility is leaking, and it is
                        costing the Department $500,000 a year. Loff said the Department had looked
                        at a number of places, and had taken NARA people to look at the Berryville
                        facility. The facility would have to be renovated, but the overall cost
                        would be lower and there would be more space. Loff noted that the trip to
                        the facility at PG Plaza was difficult because of traffic, and he argued
                        that the trip to Mount Weather <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0008"/> would
                        be only “minutes” longer and that FEMA keeps the road clean in winter. He
                        also stated that IS would have a vehicle going back and forth with records
                        as needed.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp asked if there would be space and a copier available for
                        researchers. Loff confirmed this. Wilson noted there would be a research
                        area with a copier, and researchers would have the same facilities as they
                        had at PG. Ted Keefer noted that this decision had been made without any
                        consultation with HO, a major user of the records. Historians will be faced
                        with driving 67 miles each way. Loff noted that the Records Service Center
                        would make two trips a day to pick up and deliver records between Mt.
                        Weather and Main State. <note n="1" xml:id="p5fn1">During the meeting, Loff
                            indicated that there would be a shuttle service between Mt Weather and
                            the State Department, but noted later that it was not yet decided if the
                            Department would provide that service.</note> Luke Smith and Keefer
                        commented that historians could work on the records here if there were a
                        working space in the Department. Loff said he was working on this.</p>
                    <p>Glenn LaFantasie said that a trip to Berryville is much longer than one to PG
                        and noted that the amount of research the HO staff did could not be done in
                        an 8-hour day. Kimball pointed out that IS was ready to move the records,
                        but had not yet found research space here. He commented that IS should have
                        found the research space here first and then planned to move the records.
                        Then personnel-effectiveness, which was separate from cost-effectiveness,
                        would be guaranteed.</p>
                    <p>Loff said IS wanted people to be happy. He noted that the FEMA facility had
                        apartment space and inexpensive food, in case HO staff needed to stay
                        overnight there. Kimball repeated that IS needed to find research space in
                        the metro area first, before moving the records. He urged that IS establish
                        a working liaison with the HO staff.</p>
                    <p>Nelson brought up the need for space in the Department for the
                        declassification center, which the Committee had previously supported.
                        Kimball said that the Committee did not want the declassification process
                        delayed. Nelson also noted that the Department needed access to records to
                        deal with FOIA. Loff repeated that there would be a daily shuttle to bring
                        documents back.</p>
                    <p>Leffler asked whether IS would have the problem of finding research space
                        within the Department solved by the time of the February meeting. Loff
                        replied that he hoped so. Herring asked if the records could be moved
                        without disrupting HO’s research, and Loff said the disruption would be
                        minimal.</p>
                    <p>Kimball again stated that there needed to be close liaison with HO concerning
                        this. Loff replied that this would happen and apologized for not consulting
                        HO before. Kimball said the Committee would want to make a statement on
                        this.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="department-response-to-the-japan-appeal">
                    <head>Department Response to the Japan Appeal</head>
                    <p>In response to the presence of journalists at the session, Kimball raised the
                        subject of the Department’s response to the appeal regarding the
                        declassification of documents on Japan for the 1961-1963 volume on Northeast
                        Asia. Since substance could not be discussed in a public meeting, he would
                        describe procedure. If the Historian and appropriate officials within the
                        Department of State could not agree on declassification, <pb n="6"
                            xml:id="pg_6" facs="0009"/> they must follow procedures (described in
                        the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> law) for a dialogue. If that
                        dialogue reaches an impasse, the law calls for an appeal to the Secretary of
                        State, who had delegated the final authority to Under Secretary for
                        Management Richard Moose. The appeal is on his desk. Technically, the
                        Department is in violation of the law, because nothing has been heard from
                        Moose within the statutory time frame. The Committee will discuss its next
                        step at a closed meeting.</p>
                    <p>Even if Under Secretary Moose agrees to release the documents for
                        publication, they must go to other agencies that have equity in them. Once
                        these agencies have finished their review and agree, NSC has to do its own
                        review. The entire process could take up to a year. If the documents are
                        declassified, they could be made available to the public at NARA. Herschler
                        qualified this, noting that this would be true if they were documents from
                        the Department of State Central Files. Slany noted that the law provides for
                        a 60-day clock on appeals.</p>
                    <p>Tim Weiner asked if the 1961-1963 volume on Japan would be published if the
                        verdict on declassification were negative. Kimball stated that the Committee
                        had taken the position that it would recommend against publication of the
                        Japan compilation without the documents. Weiner asked if the Committee could
                        appeal if another agency denied declassification. Kimball replied that the
                        Committee could go to the head of the other agency. Weiner asked if the NSC
                        constituted an appeals court. Kimball said no. Nelson added that subjects
                        other than Japan were included in the volume, and that the preface would
                        presumably indicate why the entire chapter was deleted. Picker pointed out
                        that the deletion would also be noted in the annual report to Congress.</p>
                    <p>Kimball stressed that the Committee merely advised the Secretary and could
                        not overrule him. It was an advisory body and did not declassify. Both he
                        and Slany said that no date had been set for State’s decision. Nelson asked
                        whether this was the first time that the Committee had recommended not
                        publishing a volume because it was incomplete. Kimball said that it was.
                        Picker stated that the Committee was guided by the statutory language as to
                        whether the omission of the documents would leave an erroneous
                        impression.</p>
                    <p>Weiner said that the public records of the Committee indicate that a problem
                        was brewing regarding a “country in this hemisphere.” Given the rich public
                        record that exists about this country, did the Committee feel that the
                        withholding of material would be for reasons of embarrassment.</p>
                    <p>Kimball replied that the country was Guyana, and that the statement in the
                        Committee’s public report should speak for itself. The process and the
                        precedents established in the Japan appeal would help move the process
                        along. He remarked on the need for a balancing test between national
                        security and the public interest, as stated in the draft Executive Order.
                        That was clearly the intent of the legislation on <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations,</hi> as shown in the records of discussions leading up to its
                        adoption. The Committee felt that ethically, philosophically, and legally it
                        should apply this balancing test. Slany pointed out that the Department was
                        still operating under the existing Executive Order, which was different.</p>
                    <p>Taylor asked Weiner about his sources for his recent <hi rend="italic">New
                            York Times</hi> article about CIA involvement in Japanese elections.
                        Weiner stated that they included U. Alexis <pb n="7" xml:id="pg_7"
                            facs="0010"/> Johnson, Douglas MacArthur II, Roger Hilsman, and former
                        director of CIA Far Eastern Operations Al Ulmer. For the rest, he pleaded
                        “sources and methods.”</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-the-opening">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on the Opening of the Department of State’s
                        30-Year Old Records at the National Archives</head>
                    <p>The Committee then turned to a discussion of the declassification review;
                        transfer to the National Archives, and opening to the public of the State
                        Department’s 30-year old records. The subcommittee had visited Archives II
                        at College Park the day before. They examined declassification guidelines
                        and talked to persons involved. Herring expressed his concern that the
                        guidelines seemed over-restrictive and seemed to reflect the climate of an
                        earlier era. Picker felt that it should be possible to issue the guidelines
                        in declassified form. Van Camp noted that agency guidelines had been created
                        at different times, so no overall guidelines existed. Could an inter-agency
                        approach be devised?</p>
                    <p>Nelson asked whether the Committee had a mandate. Kimball replied that the
                        Committee cared greatly about opening Department of State records. Most
                        guidelines could be declassified. Leffler suggested the Committee go on
                        record as favoring this. Kimball then introduced Tony Dalsimer, the new head
                        of HDR.</p>
                    <p>Davis agreed with Herring and Picker: certainly the historical summaries
                        included in guidelines should be releasable, and an interagency approach was
                        desirable. Kimball said that either an Executive Order or legislation was
                        desirable. Davis said that the question was how to move forward in the
                        meantime.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp noted that HDR reviewers worked at NARA. Material segregated was
                        from other agencies. She wondered if HDR could apply the guidelines of other
                        agencies, since archivists had such authority. Kimball said that DOD had a
                        good set of guidelines, which NARA used. DOD had been asked to extend its
                        authority to State documents in its possession. No reply had been received.
                        Kimball continued by saying that the CIA “doesn’t even trust itself.” It has
                        no single declassification authority. NSC also lacked guidelines.</p>
                    <p>After Leffler asked whether the Committee would go on record as favoring the
                        declassification of guidelines, Kimball said that various “nitpicking
                        things” made the work of HDR reviewers difficult, such as the CIA having
                        cognizance over all biographical materials. In a better world, there would
                        be a single statement, Executive Order, or law.</p>
                    <p>Page Miller then described how State had complied (or not complied) with
                        legislation. She favored oversight hearings. The 2-year grace period had
                        expired last October, after which Senator Pell read a statement into the
                        record expressing his disappointment. The law did not include penalties for
                        non-compliance. She disagreed with Van Camp that State had done its best and
                        that the problem was with other agencies.</p>
                    <p>Kimball agreed that State had been slow to take action, but after the first
                        year had devoted additional resources and made significant progress in
                        transferring its records to the National Archives. Now most of the trouble
                        was with other agencies.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said it was difficult to judge the effectiveness of State’s
                        compliance. He had seen guidelines for one country and was appalled at their
                        extensiveness. Could higher authorities in State be appealed to? Possible
                        goals were declassifying the <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0011"/>
                        guidelines, inter-agency cooperation, and a report on compliance. Once these
                        were addressed, Congress would have something on which to hold hearings.</p>
                    <p>Herring said that coordination could still be a means of delay. Picker
                        wondered what might happen if other agencies found State’s new guidelines
                        too lax.</p>
                    <p>The Committee adjourned at 11:20 a.m. to go to a luncheon meeting at the
                        Central Intelligence Agency.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="closed-session">
                <head>Closed Session</head>
                <p>Kimball called the meeting to order at 2:55 p.m. after the Committee’s return
                    from the working lunch at the CIA. He asked all those not authorized to attend
                    the closed portion of the meeting to leave.</p>
                <div xml:id="discussion-of-committee-minutes">
                    <head>Discussion of Committee Minutes</head>
                    <p>Kimball then asked members of the Committee to review the minutes of the May
                        meeting and to approve two changes that involved omitting two short phrases
                        that contained classified information. Kimball commented that the changes
                        were necessary so that the minutes could be made public.</p>
                    <p>Nelson had some reservations about the changes and asked if the minutes would
                        reflect the fact that some information had been omitted. Slany responded
                        that classified information should not have been included in the minutes in
                        the first place.</p>
                    <p>Nelson was concerned that, if the changes were made, it might appear that the
                        Committee was hiding something. In order to avoid the appearance of
                        concealment, she again suggested that some notation about the omission
                        appear on the minutes. Kimball said he had no objection to including a
                        notation to the effect that the minutes had been edited to remove classified
                        information.</p>
                    <p>Luke Smith asked whether notetakers should edit the minutes as the notes are
                        recorded. Both Slany and Kimball said no. Kimball went on to say that Slany
                        should do any necessary editing. He also said that the minutes could note
                        that a classified discussion on a particular topic took place without
                        mentioning the specific information discussed.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="schedule-for-future-committee-meetings">
                    <head>Schedule for Future Committee Meetings</head>
                    <p>Kimball then moved on to discuss scheduling for upcoming meetings and asked
                        members of the Committee for information concerning their availability. He
                        pointed out that the Committee needed to meet three times prior to August
                        31, 1995. With that in mind, he reported that a meeting would be scheduled
                        in late January or early February, in May or June, and in August. He
                        conceded that although an August meeting caused problems for many members,
                        they would have to adjust their schedules since August was an ideal time for
                        a meeting. A new chair would be elected about that time, a matter that
                        should be taken care of before the three new members joined the Committee.
                        He also pointed out that August was a good time to meet because it was at
                        the end of the academic year and the time the annual report was
                        prepared.</p>
                    <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0012"/>
                    <p>Nelson asked if copies of Committee minutes and reports would be sent to new
                        members. Kimball replied that they are already receiving material, and he
                        would be sending them information to keep them up-to-speed on the issues
                        facing the Committee.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-by-michael-kurtz">
                    <head>Report by Michael Kurtz, Acting Assistant Archivist, on Declassification
                        of Department of State Records</head>
                    <p>Kimball moved on to the action items on the agenda, including the meeting of
                        the Committee with the CIA. Before discussing that topic, however, he asked
                        Michael Kurtz Acting Assistant Archivist, to report on the transfer of
                        Department of State records to Archives II.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz gave a brief review of the progress made to date: The review work has
                        been completed on Department of State Central File documents covering the
                        period from 1960 to 1963; the transfer of 1964-1966 documents to College
                        Park is about to begin; the transfer to Archives II of the civilian
                        classified records was proceeding well and the civilian classified staff
                        would be moving out to College Park in mid-November; military classified
                        documents will be handled in the same manner.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Kurtz about arrangements for liaison and planning for the move
                        so that the down-time for access to documents does not affect the work of
                        HO. Kurtz indicated that an appropriate procedure was in place.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz then discussed the remaining still classified pre-1945 records and said
                        that all clearances had been received from all U.S. agencies and from the
                        British. Nelson asked whether the documents originated from the period of
                        World War II.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz explained that the documents were military and civilian records from
                        World War II and that he chose the documents to be part of this
                        declassification project. He also reported that there has been no further
                        information on a pending Executive Order because interagency issues remained
                        unresolved.</p>
                    <p>That comment spurred Kimball to mention the Committee’s deep concern about
                        the apparent lack of interagency communication. It appeared that Advisory
                        Committee meetings served as the channel for information to be shared. He
                        also told Kurtz that the Committee may be able to help move the
                        declassification process along. Kurtz said he was encouraged by the help the
                        Committee has already provided.</p>
                    <p>Going back to the topic of inadequate sharing of information among agencies,
                        Kimball gave an example. He said the Committee believed that only recently
                        were declassification guidelines gathered and sent to the Presidential
                        libraries. No one knows why that happened, but it did, and it was unsettling
                        that it happened. He said the problem needs to be solved.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz concluded his report, and Nelson asked him if he had heard anything
                        from the NSA. Kurtz reported that he had not.</p>
                    <p>Kimball reported that in September the Deputy Director of NSA sent a rather
                        ambivalent letter to the Committee on the pre-1945 intelligence documents,
                        the Yardley collection, the Magic documents, and the so-called Crane
                        collection. Kimball distributed copies of the letter to the Committee
                        members and attendees from the National Archives. He said he would follow up
                        on the letter, and said he knows that the Department of State has no
                        objections to releasing the material.</p>
                    <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0013"/>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="further-discussion-of-the-japan-appeal">
                    <head>Further Discussion of the Japan Appeal</head>
                    <p>Kimball turned to a discussion of the Japan appeal and said that he wanted
                        the Committee’s agreement on how to proceed.</p>
                    <p>Nelson asked if the discussion of the issue would mean that the minutes of
                        the meeting would be classified. Kimball said they would not discuss
                        substance, but a course of action, so the minutes would not be
                        classified.</p>
                    <p>Kimball reminded the Committee members that no decision had been received
                        from Moose, and the deadline for his response had already passed. Davis
                        asked if Moose would make a decision today. Van Camp stated that the
                        Committee cannot wait and should do what the law provides&#x02014;notify
                        Congress. Nelson agreed, because the reply was taking so long.</p>
                    <p>Kimball pointed out that that was a confrontational action. He suggested as
                        an alternative that he or the Committee write a draft letter, with support
                        from Donilon, informing the Secretary of State that unless the process moved
                        forward, the Committee was prepared to act. Kimball hoped that this would
                        move the process along.</p>
                    <p>Nelson asked what the Committee would do if the higher authorities said no.
                        Kimball replied that the answer to that question was already in the minutes
                        and the Committee is already on record as to what it would do if
                        declassification was refused. He suggested getting some influence or
                        momentum within the Department in order to get some action. He asked if all
                        members agreed to preparing a draft letter.</p>
                    <p>Taylor suggested sending a letter directly to Congress. Kimball responded
                        that if the Committee takes a hard line from the start, what happens to the
                        process? It appears that there are conflicting arguments within the
                        Department and maybe beyond the Department, so the lines seem to be drawn
                        already. The best procedure may be for the Committee to remind people that
                        the issue is still open and needs an answer.</p>
                    <p>Leffler asked if that meant that a letter would not be sent to Congress yet.
                        Kimball replied that at this point only a draft would be written, a friendly
                        letter making it clear that the Committee insists that action be taken on
                        this matter.</p>
                    <p>After further discussion, everyone on the Committee except Taylor agreed to
                        the nonconfrontational approach at this time. Taylor had some reservations.
                        He suggested including in the draft letter a concrete timeframe for a reply.
                        Kimball agreed and suggested the letter ask for a response within 2 weeks.
                        Picker suggested a deadline before Thanksgiving or before the holidays.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp asked if it might be possible to get an answer on the issue today.
                        Slany said that Under Secretary Moose wants to make a positive decision, but
                        the fact that he has not given a decision indicates that he is trying to
                        respond to conflicting advice from different bureaus in the Department. He
                        is taking the matter seriously.</p>
                    <p>Kimball added that Deputy Assistant Secretary Bennett Freeman spoke to Under
                        Secretary Moose about the matter. If any information is received from
                        Freeman, Kimball would hold off submitting the draft letter. No decision was
                        expected, however. Kimball expressed the Committee’s sentiment that it was
                        time to take some action. The Committee had been patient, but the 60-day
                        clock began in June and expired in August, <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11"
                            facs="0014"/> so a decision had to be made. Moose had pretty much said
                        that a decision would be made in October.</p>
                    <p>Slany said that HO itself has not acted quickly either. It is difficult for
                        us to educate others who have different approaches and points of view on
                        such matters. At least the issue is being given serious consideration, and
                        that is a major change for the better.</p>
                    <p>Returning to the course the Committee should follow, Kimball emphasized that
                        the Committee does not want confrontation, but cooperation. Taylor asked if
                        sending a letter to Congress was confrontational. Herring suggested that the
                        Committee must indicate that it had gone beyond thinking about acting, that
                        it was prepared to act.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked if it was time to compromise. Taylor responded that a
                        compromise was not needed. If the rest of the Committee did not agree to
                        send the letter to Congress, he would go along with it, but he wished his
                        reservation to be noted in the minutes.</p>
                    <p>Kimball replied that he would enclose a draft letter containing the
                        Committee’s position in an unofficial and personal note to Donilon. The note
                        will say that the letter will be sent to the Secretary and to Congress, if
                        nothing is done on the matter now. Van Camp suggested that the letter be
                        sent only to Donilon and not be shared with others. Kimball agreed saying
                        that he had received an unofficial letter from Donilon and he would write
                        back unofficially.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that the Committee agrees (except for Taylor) that he should
                        draft a letter to Donilon concerning the Japan appeal, saying that the
                        Committee is preparing a note for the Secretary of State (which would also
                        go to Congress) if M does not decide about the Japan appeal soon. The letter
                        would not be confrontational, but would point out that the 60-day legislated
                        timeframe for responding to the appeal has expired.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp stressed that the letter should go only to Donilon at this point.
                        Kimball agreed that it is his intention that the letter go to Donilon only,
                        but added that it is no secret that the Committee feels strongly about
                        this.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="further-discussion-of-the-move-of-department">
                    <head>Further Discussion of the Move of Department of State Files to
                        Berryville</head>
                    <p>Kimball asked for someone to draft a letter containing a Committee response
                        to the proposed move of State Department records to Berryville. He said that
                        the two main issues the Committee is concerned about are: 1) the creation of
                        an adequate working space in or close to the Department; and 2) there should
                        be liaison with HO in the move plans so that the transfer of documents does
                        not conflict with the HO schedule. Humphrey added (and the Committee agreed)
                        that the workspace and equipment must be adequate at the Berryville
                        site.</p>
                    <p>Leffler suggested that Slany draft the letter and the Committee sign it. The
                        Committee agreed.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="further-discussion-of-declassification-guidelines">
                    <head>Further Discussion of Declassification Guidelines</head>
                    <p>Kimball said that the Committee would like to be involved in making
                        declassification guidelines less restrictive, and he and Herring asked
                        rhetorically “What <pb n="12" xml:id="pg_12" facs="0015"/> are we trying to
                        protect?” Slany asked if the Committee was willing to come back to review
                        the guidelines. The Committee nodded.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp explained that most of the guidelines were originally written for
                        NARA’s use, but the situation has changed and State has assumed most of the
                        responsibility. She suggested that this is an opportunity to reshape how
                        guidelines are prepared for use with the 1964-1966 record block.</p>
                    <p>Marvin Russell said that NARA still needs guidelines. He gave an example of
                        State records in USIA files.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp reiterated that this is a good window of opportunity to reshape the
                        State guidelines. Nelson noted that the guidelines are also important
                        because they are used by archivists for mandatory review, etc.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Dalsimer what is the status of the 1964-1966 guidelines.
                        Dalsimer responded that HDR is working on them. Hamilton explained that
                        Morefield is working on new guidelines and has prepared a concept paper on
                        the scope of the 1964-1966 guidelines. He noted that the guidelines are
                        taking into account the change to the subject-numeric filing system. He
                        explained that HDR had drafted the guidelines for the administrative part of
                        the file first for two reasons: 1) they go faster and 2) they come first in
                        the subject-numeric system. He added that they respond to the priorities
                        they are given.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Dalsimer if there are ways to create a consultative process
                        between HO and HDR. He said that the Committee “does not declassify, we are
                        concerned about concepts,” as in “What is the philosophy behind
                        declassification?” Dalsimer and Hamilton consulted and Hamilton said this
                        was possible.</p>
                    <p>Nancy Smith commented that State can issue guidelines for unclassified
                        documents that are less than 30 years old (as the NSC did). She was
                        continuing when Kimball interjected that specifics are unnecessary at this
                        time; she could work out the issue with Dalsimer.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz said that NARA will send requests to State.</p>
                    <p>Nelson again raised the earlier question of what now must remain secret, and
                        said that there is a lack of clarity. Herring commented that it is more than
                        a lack of clarity, it is an issue of consistency. Nelson continued that the
                        Committee feels that there are contradictions in the guidelines.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that one thing we should do is have one compiler work with HDR
                        to try to play a role to help HDR create the guidelines that they are doing
                        now. Dalsimer agreed that that sounded plausible, and Slany also agreed.
                        Kimball said that Slany and Dalsimer will talk about this, and then the
                        Committee will discuss it through E-Mail. (There was a lively discussion
                        about E-Mail and the refusal of some Committee members to use it.) He added
                        that the Committee wants to take action, but needs to know what to do.</p>
                    <p>Leffler asked about the declassification of the old guidelines. Pryor
                        reminded the Committee that the new guidelines refer to the old ones.
                        Herring commented that they should start with a clean slate.</p>
                    <p>Leffler reiterated that the Committee is looking for an opportunity to advise
                        on the guidelines. Reviewing them in draft form would be a good opportunity
                        to comment on them before they are final. Dalsimer noted that it would not
                        be necessary to put the <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0016"/> request in
                        writing but that he would like it put in the minutes. Kimball repeated for
                        the notetakers that they are talking about looking at existing guidelines to
                        declassify as much as possible.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that the lack of interagency coordination of declassification
                        procedures would be alleviated if the new Executive order was promulgated.
                        Leffler questioned that and said that a consequence of that could be to make
                        it more restrictive. Davis asked what made Leffler so pessimistic, and
                        Nelson interjected “experience.” Davis said that between JCS (and DOD, etc.)
                        and State, JCS is more liberal.</p>
                    <p>Kimball brought up the British system of automatic declassification and asked
                        which is better. Nelson pointed out that a system that is too orderly could
                        be a problem. Kimball said that what Leffler is saying is that we could
                        benefit from the confusion that arose from a lack of interagency
                        coordination.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp said that we shouldn’t second guess the new Executive order, that it
                        is late in the day to question the executive order since the Committee has
                        gone on record as supporting it. She said that we must reiterate our support
                        of this.</p>
                    <p>Picker suggested that they ask someone in the State hierarchy about what
                        should remain secret. Kimball said that all of the desk officers will say:
                        “Everything on my country should remain classified, and release everything
                        else.”</p>
                    <p>Slany advised that the Committee should await the outcome of the new
                        Executive order before seeking an explanation from Under Secretary Moose or
                        another Department official about the principles of the Department of State
                        for retaining classification on documents.</p>
                    <p>Picker asked if it is possible to know if any papers or studies have been
                        written on the basis of documents declassified under the 1960-1963
                        guidelines for countries such as the Soviet Union, where so much more has
                        been declassified.</p>
                    <p>Herring said that what is in effect are the older guidelines from 1955 to
                        1959. He added that these were drafted in the 1980s. Hamilton said that the
                        new guidelines state what is still sensitive and they were prepared in
                        1992-1993. Picker reiterated that in drafting the guidelines HDR needs more
                        direction from on high rather than simply relying on their own individual
                        judgment.</p>
                    <p>Pryor said that the 1960-1963 guidelines were completed in 1993 on the basis
                        of HDR’s review of the old guidelines. The 1960-1963 guidelines identify
                        what is still sensitive and what is not. She said that in drafting the
                        guidelines they used their own judgment as well as Bureau advice. Kimball
                        said that he believed that the philosophical approach had been covered
                        within the Department under the discussion of the new Executive order.
                        Picker pointed out that it is hard to link the Executive order and the
                        guidelines from the legal standpoint.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that the guidelines will have to be rewritten. The Committee
                        should wait to evaluate the consultative process, keeping in mind the
                        question of “what are we trying to protect.” A subcommittee will deal with
                        the issue at the next meeting.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-records">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on Records</head>
                    <p>Van Camp reported on her subcommittee’s examination of the Africa Bureau
                        files with respect to a new disposition schedule covering the files created
                        since 1990. At the <pb n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0017"/> last meeting they
                        were asked to look at the records schedule for the Bureau of African
                        Affairs. Yesterday the subcommittee visited the Bureau to look at the
                        schedules and visit the offices to see what kind of records are in their
                        files. The recommendation of the subcommittee is that this schedule is
                        adequate for these records. Some of the files will be permanently retained,
                        while others are designated to be destroyed (some in the short term and some
                        in the long). She said that the subcommittee thinks that the schedule is
                        appropriate and recommended that it go forward.</p>
                    <p>She also recommended that HO work with the records management staff to
                        develop guidelines and procedures for screening files by other offices
                        before destruction to ensure that all appropriate historical records are
                        preserved in the Central Files. She added that the subcommittee had
                        discussed this with the Records Management staff and they believed that this
                        was workable.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked if the Committee agreed, and they concurred in the
                        recommendations.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp brought up the issue of the disposition of records scheduled for
                        destruction and whether an outside institution can request custody of those
                        records. The current procedure is that once the schedule is approved, the
                        institution can ask State to seek NARA’s permission to take custody of the
                        disposable files.</p>
                    <p>Taylor said that the Committee could say that the issue of disposition should
                        be left open to include other arrangements. He said that the Committee
                        should clearly endorse the principle that such records might go to an
                        interested institution. (Taylor’s comments in the form of a letter to Van
                        Camri are in Annex 1.)</p>
                    <p>Nelson said the Committee should “encourage” if not endorse the principle.
                        Leffler added that it should not incur government expense. Taylor agreed and
                        said that it should be at the expense of the institution.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked if the Committee was in agreement.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp said that the Committee’s responsibility is to advise the State
                        Department on its records, but what happens to duplicate files (at the time
                        of their ultimate disposition) is not the Committee’s business.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that the Committee might say that, in the spirit of public
                        access to foreign policy records, the Advisory Committee encourages
                        practices and measures that will lead to the availability of duplicate sets
                        of records in outside depositories and will look with favor on any action to
                        preserve these records.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp said that she is not sure what the outcome of this would be. If the
                        records disposition process works, this kind of thing should not be
                        necessary. She said that the disposition process should take its course.</p>
                    <p>Kimball added that it makes people more sensitive to the records. He called
                        it to a vote. The Committee voted that the Advisory Committee is in favor of
                        “nose-sticking.” He requested that Van Camp draft an appropriate statement
                        (see Annex 2).</p>
                    <p>Van Camp said that in talking to the desk officers the subcommittee got the
                        sense that the deliberative process within the offices is not adequately
                        reflected in the records because of E-Mail and other issues. She suggested
                        that the subcommittee should examine this issue.</p>
                    <pb n="15" xml:id="pg_15" facs="0018"/>
                    <p>Kimball said that it would be useful if her subcommittee consult Ken Rossman
                        and the Records Management staff and put together a list of items for the
                        subcommittee to focus on at the next meeting.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="foreign-relations-coordinator-in-hdr">
                    <head>Foreign Relations Coordinator in HDR</head>
                    <p>Kimball said that the Committee has learned that Jeanne Pryor is leaving HDR
                        on November 1. He remarked that she had made an important contribution to
                        the series and applauded her good management. He added that many problems
                        had been solved during her tenure in HDR and thanked her for her
                        contribution. There was general applause. He hoped that her replacement
                        would continue the good work. Dalsimer introduced Nina Noring as Pryor’s
                        replacement. Kimball commented that because Noring is a former member of the
                        Historical Office, the Committee anticipated a high level of cooperation
                        with HO.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-on-the-visit-to-the-central-intelligence-agency">
                    <head>Report on the Visit to the Central Intelligence Agency</head>
                    <p>Kimball said that the last item on the agenda is to summarize the CIA visit.
                        He suggested that they write a memorandum to Hazlewood summarizing the
                        positive things that Hazlewood said in their meeting. For example, all
                        covert operations reflect foreign policy goals, therefore it is in our
                        purview. He asked the members to E-Mail him on this.</p>
                    <p>Herring commented that they also seemed to be forthcoming on the issue of
                        provenance.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said that the Agency was willing to acknowledge to HO where covert
                        operations occurred, so the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes
                        can document them. The Committee disagreed on what the CIA meant by this
                        acknowledgment. Nelson said that this is acknowledgment for research and
                        access purposes, not for declassification.</p>
                    <p>Kimball recalled his complaint about the problem of plausible deniability,
                        that the historians must ask the right question to get the right answer. CIA
                        had asked for examples of this. Kimball explained that LaFantasie had raised
                        the issue of Tibet documents, very few of which had been found at the CIA.
                        Kimball said that it is “memoranda blizzard time.” The historians have to
                        explain and request every little thing, and then send memoranda to McDonald
                        explaining that they have been told that there are no documents on a
                        particular subject.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said that McDonald claimed that no HO historian had ever left his
                        office dissatisfied; he asked for an example. Schwar said that she sent a
                        letter to CIA specifically asking for documents on Tibet. She did not write
                        a response to CIA’s reply. Luke Smith said that the history staff at CIA
                        does not always know if there are documents on a subject. Kimball repeated
                        the need for a paper trail and asked Slany to work out a process, and the
                        Advisory Committee will see if it agrees to it.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said that the CIA said that they will respond affirmatively if we ask
                        if covert operations&#x02014;not actions&#x02014;occurred in certain
                        countries. Kimball emphasized that the historians must be specific when
                        wording their requests. Nelson also recalled that they were told that
                        “finding aid” means something different to the CIA than it does to the <pb
                            n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0019"/> Department of State, so the
                        historians should use the term “shelf list” instead. Kimball repeated that
                        he will write a memorandum on these issues but needs help from the
                        Committee.</p>
                    <p>Kimball cleared the room except for HO staff at 4:25 p.m.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="ho-staff-comments">
                    <head>HO Staff Comments</head>
                    <p>Slany remarked that the Committee had asked about publication of our volumes
                        on CD/ROM. Vicki Futscher is working on this for the Office. Later, a single
                        CD will include the text of all 25 Kennedy volumes. He distributed copies of
                        the Department’s first CD/ROM publication containing public statements and
                        publications such as <hi rend="italic">Dispatch</hi> to the Committee.</p>
                    <p>Nelson noted that many colleges don’t have the equipment to access these
                        types of publications, and she hoped that this would not replace print
                        volumes. Slany assured the Committee that publication on CD/ROM would not
                        replace the printed <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes; it
                        would provide an additional means for the dissemination of the volumes.</p>
                    <p>Kimball stated that the Committee will take a strong position on the move of
                        the Department of State records to Berryville. He assumes that it will take
                        place, but the Committee will try to help to make it workable. Patterson
                        said that the declassification center in the Department of State (when
                        established) might be able to house the Central Files, which are stored in
                        cabinets. What takes space is the lot files (office and post files), which
                        can be pulled in quickly when needed, but the Central Files are different.
                        Kimball reiterated that HO needs to be consulted on the move. He will send a
                        memorandum to Ken Loff on the declassification center and to Assistant
                        Secretary Donilon saying that the Committee is eager for it to be
                        established.</p>
                    <p>Luke Smith commented that if a compiler is asked to participate in the work
                        on the guidelines it will take away from the time he or she has to compile
                        manuscripts. Kimball responded that <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        will still take priority but that HO participation is necessary.</p>
                    <p>He noted that he had again raised the issue with HDR for formal training for
                        HDR declassifiers. He added that the Committee has raised it before, but
                        nothing was done. Hamilton had told them that informal training was done,
                        but the Committee agreed that that was not sufficient. Finally, he noted
                        that Dalsimer had said he could arrange for the Committee to go to the
                        NSC.</p>
                    <p>The meeting adjourned at 4:35 p.m.</p>
                    <pb n="[17]" xml:id="pg_17" facs="0020"/>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="annex-1_1">
                <head><hi rend="bold">ANNEX 1</hi></head>
                <p rend="center"><hi rend="bold">HOWARD UNIVERSITY</hi></p>
                <p rend="center"><hi rend="bold"><hi rend="smallcaps">washington, d.c.</hi>
                        20059</hi></p>
                <p><hi rend="smallcaps">College of Arts</hi> &#x00026; <hi rend="smallcaps">Sciences
                        department of history</hi>October 6, 1994</p>
                <p>Dr. Anne Van Camp</p>
                <p>Hoover Institution Archives</p>
                <p>Hoover Institution</p>
                <p>Stanford, California</p>
                <p>Dear Anne,</p>
                <p>My views on the subjects in your attached memo of 9/29/94 are as follows:</p>
                <p>1. Records of historical value scheduled for destruction when ten years old
                    should be reviewed after five or seven years to determine if they may be
                    released before the scheduled disposal date. Meanwhile a subcommittee of the
                    Advisory Committee might review some of the records scheduled for destruction
                    when ten years old or earlier to assess their historical value and make
                    recommendations regarding their disposal, provided, of course, the State
                    Department allows the committee access to those records. With these
                    understandings we should endorse the proposed schedule for disposition of the
                    records.</p>
                <p>2. Records of historical value that are scheduled for destruction should be
                    donated to organizations that can make efficient use of them for teaching and/or
                    research purposes. Howard University is an ideal depository for the African
                    Bureau records because of its historical and current interest and involvement in
                    African affairs, the number of Africa area specialists on its faculty, its
                    African Studies Department and Program, and its recently established
                    International Studies Research Center.</p>
                <p>3. Since HO has requested our advice, the committee should proffer its opinion
                    and suggestions. Moreover, the spirit of our general mandate, if not the letter,
                    should validate our interest in enhancing public access to the unclassified
                    records of the State Department.</p>
                <p>I hope some of these views fall within the parameters of the assignment that we
                    were given.</p>
                <p rend="center">Sincerely,</p>
                <p>cc: W. Kimball, M. Leffler</p>
                <pb n="[18]" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0021"/>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="annex-2_1">
                <head><hi rend="bold">ANNEX 2</hi></head>
                <p rend="center"><hi rend="bold">Statement on Disposal of Department of State
                        Records</hi></p>
                <p>If and when the Department of State is at the point of disposing of records no
                    longer needed, and if and when outside entities should then offer to receive
                    such records at no cost to the government and in keeping with all relevant
                    regulations, this Committee would look with favor on Departmental responsiveness
                    in such cases.</p>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
