<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1995-05-11_minutes_classified_omitted">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, May
                    1995</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1995</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1995-05-11">May 11, 1995</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front>
            <pb n="[i]" xml:id="pg_i" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section"
                xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation-may-1112--1995_1">
                <head><hi rend="bold">Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation May
                        11–12, 1995</hi></head>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Committee Members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Warren F. Kimball, Chairman</item>
                    <item>Benton Vincent Davis, Jr.</item>
                    <item>George C. Herring, Jr.</item>
                    <item>Michael J. Hogan</item>
                    <item>Melvyn P. Leffler</item>
                    <item>Jane M. Picker</item>
                    <item>Emily S. Rosenberg</item>
                    <item>Michael R. Schaller</item>
                    <item>Anne Van Camp</item>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Public Affairs</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Susan Povenmire</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of the Historian</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Director</item>
                    <item>Rita Baker</item>
                    <item>Paul Claussen</item>
                    <item>Evan Duncan</item>
                    <item>Vicki Futscher</item>
                    <item>Karen Gatz</item>
                    <item>David Geyer</item>
                    <item>Deb Godfrey</item>
                    <item>David Herschler</item>
                    <item>Nina Howland</item>
                    <item>David Humphrey</item>
                    <item>Donna Hung</item>
                    <item>Ted Keefer</item>
                    <item>Harmon Kirby</item>
                    <item>Glenn LaFantasie</item>
                    <item>Dan Lawler</item>
                    <item>Gabrielle Mallon</item>
                    <item>Jim Miller</item>
                    <item>David Patterson</item>
                    <item>Harriet Schwar</item>
                    <item>Luke Smith</item>
                    <item>Jeff Soukup</item>
                    <item>Shirtey Taylor</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Frank Machak, Director, A/IM/IS/FPC</item>
                    <item>Anthony Dalsimer, Director, FPC/HDR</item>
                    <item>William Hamilton, FPC/HDR</item>
                    <item>Nina Noring, FPC/HDR</item>
                </list>
                <pb n="[ii]" xml:id="pg_ii" facs="0002"/>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Ken Walters, DS/ISP/APB</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Central Intelligence Agency</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Brian Latell, Director, Center for the Study of Intelligence</item>
                    <item>Kay Oliver, Chief; History Staff</item>
                    <item>Gerold K. Haines, Historian</item>
                    <item>Scott A. Koch, Historian</item>
                    <item>Donald P. Steury, Historian</item>
                    <item>Michael S. Warner, Historian</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">National Archives and Records Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>George C. Chalou, Archivist, Records Appraisal Division</item>
                    <item>Michael Kurtz, Acting Assistant Archivist for the National Archives</item>
                    <item>David Langbart, Archivist, Records Appraisal and Disposition
                        Division</item>
                    <item>Jerome Nashorn, Chief, Military Appraisal Branch</item>
                    <item>Marvin Russell, Chief, General Archives Review Branch</item>
                    <item>Nancy K. Smith, Archivist, Office of Presidential Libraries</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Nixon Presidential Historical Materials Project</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William H. Cunliffe, Director</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Private</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>David Goldman</item>
                    <item>Mikio Haruna, Kyodo News Service</item>
                </list>
                <pb n="[iii]" xml:id="pg_iii" facs="0003"/>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="contents">
                <head>Table of Contents</head>
                <table cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="bold">Open Session, May 11</hi></cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report by the Historian</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_1">1</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Publication of Japan Chapter in <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                                Relations</hi>, 1961-1963, Volume ΧΧΠ</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_3">3</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Planning for Publication of the Record of the Nixon and Ford
                            Administrations</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_4">4</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>New Executive Order on National Security Information</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_7">7</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="bold">Closed Session, May 11</hi></cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on Opening the Department of State’s
                            30-Year Old Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_8">8</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>NARA Comments on the Executive Order on National Security Information
                            and Access to Records at the Presidential Libraries</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_11">11</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Planning for <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> Volumes
                            Documenting the Nixon and Ford Administrations</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_14">14</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Declassification Problems of <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                            Volumes</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_15">15</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on CIA Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_16">16</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="bold">Closed Session, May 12</hi></cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Access to and Declassification of CIA Records: Report and Comments by
                            CIA Officials</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_17">17</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report on the Records of the Office of the Legal Adviser</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_25">25</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
            </div>
        </front>
        <body>
            <pb n="[1]" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0004"/>
            <div xml:id="open-session-may-11">
                <head>OPEN SESSION, May 11</head>
                <p>Kimball called the meeting to order at 9:05 a.m. He warned that each speaker was
                    responsible for informing the Chairman if any classified, privileged, or
                    off-the-record information was being discussed. It was assumed that all other
                    information was on the record. Kimball recognized David Goldman, a candidate to
                    join the staff of the Historian’s Office, and Slany noted that vacancies were
                    being filled.</p>
                <p>Kimball stated that since no members of the press were present, Slany could
                    proceed with a discussion of agenda changes. It was announced that Ken Walters
                    would substitute for John Hancock in a briefing on the new executive order;
                    Frank Machak might also speak; and the ISOO briefing scheduled for Friday had
                    been canceled. The minutes of the February meeting were approved with one
                    correction requested by Hogan&#x02014;-“Ohio State University” instead of “Ohio
                    University”&#x02014;on page 7. Slany noted that the minutes would now be
                    available to the public at the Department’s FOIA reading room.</p>
                <div xml:id="report-by-the-historian">
                    <head>Report by the Historian</head>
                    <p>Slany noted that the written report included in the briefing material
                        summarized the status of the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        series. Slany said that 1995 should be a banner year for publication, but
                        unless clearance problems with other agencies were resolved, not much would
                        be published next year. The Office Was within range of the 30-year line, but
                        it was slipping away because of clearance difficulties with the CIA. Thanks
                        to the Committee’s interest, officers of the Department have helped make
                        available needed records of the Department. The Office was increasingly
                        successful in gaining access to CIA records.</p>
                    <p>Discussion of access to the audiotapes of the telephone conversations of
                        President Johnson should be deferred as an agenda item for several more
                        months to see how the project was working. The plan for using the LBJ
                        telephone conversations called for making a careful, thoughtful selection to
                        ensure that the most significant parts were reflected in the series. This in
                        turn should facilitate the eventual opening of the entire collection at the
                        LBJ Library. At its last meeting, the Committee had recommended adding a
                        statement to the prefaces of LBJ volumes explaining how the telephone
                        conversations were used. Kimball noted that the preface for each volume
                        should also note problems or successes in access to intelligence documents
                        and other specialized material.</p>
                    <p>Slany described a new problem in preparing the series even as old obstacles
                        were being rolled back: the discovery of new records was having a potential
                        impact on the publication of volumes. Volumes close to publication were
                        being delayed while added materials were edited, cleared, and typeset. It
                        would be useful to have the Committee’s advice concerning the point at which
                        the Office should go forward with the manuscript of any particular volume at
                        hand. Compiling was no longer a tidy process because important new documents
                        continuously appeared. The Committee might advise on whether the Office
                        should hold off publishing in order to add material in cleared or
                        almost-cleared volumes.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp raised the question of access to CIA records. Kimball indicated that
                        this would be discussed. It was not clear how long it would take the new
                        Director to <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0005"/> develop a new structure,
                        but it was not likely to happen quickly. Herring said that access might be
                        even slower in the short term. Van Camp suggested that the Office determine
                        when a volume has passed the point beyond which it is too costly to make
                        changes. The preface should note that in the “changing informational
                        environment” new materials may come to light, and suggest that the reader
                        check future volumes.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked what would happen if new materials invalidated the original
                        thrust of a volume. He felt that HO historians should make the decision, but
                        a “quick reaction” group of at least two Committee members should be
                        available to examine significant material and recommend either delay or
                        publication.</p>
                    <p>Davis asked whether supplements to volumes had ever been considered. There
                        was some general discussion of various types of supplements, add-ons,
                        inserts, etc. Slany noted that the Office was reluctant to include material
                        in supplements or inserts that might become separated in libraries. Kimball
                        pointed out that only three documents were at issue in the 1961–1963 Japan
                        compilation. Davis reminded the Committee that encyclopedias used to publish
                        supplements. Rosenberg noted that the Army official histories included
                        packets of maps. Picker wondered about inserting new pages in volumes and
                        suggested that a group of supplements might eventually be needed. Kimball
                        wondered whether a cumulative index would be feasible. Rosenberg warned that
                        the existence of a supplement might encourage declassifies to delay their
                        decisions. She suggested that the issue of supplements be reevaluated after
                        a year.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that the Committee’s discussion had been mixing
                        declassification and access issues. The former was the greater problem, with
                        a declassification schedule set by law. Documents could be available well
                        before <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes were published.
                        Rosenberg said that Congress must be notified if publication was likely to
                        stop. Kimball said that this was a different issue. The chief concern under
                        discussion here was that new document collections might change the thrust of
                        published volumes.</p>
                    <p>Picker said that if the two mandated goals were in conflict, accuracy should
                        prevail. Kimball noted that most newly discovered documents caused no
                        fundamental changes and could be included in a supplemental volume. CD-ROM
                        was an even more flexible format. New finds could be announced in State
                        Department <hi rend="italic">Dispatch</hi> or another publication. The
                        British were doing something like this.</p>
                    <p>Slany then turned to the status of National Security Agency records. There
                        has been no response to a query of last year concerning access to intercepts
                        from naval vessels in the Tonkin Gulf incident. The <hi rend="italic"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi> volume has long since been published, so any new
                        documents would have to come out in a retrospective volume. Kimball said
                        that there had been a little progress, but not appropriate progress. When he
                        asked to see the BRUSA agreement on intelligence-sharing, he alone got to
                        see only parts of it.</p>
                    <p>After Slany said the access agreement with NSA was not as complete as those
                        with the CIA and NSC, Kimball called it “procedurally useless.” He believed
                        that if the need could be demonstrated, access would be granted. Perhaps
                        seeing contemporary paraphrases of NSA intercepts would avoid compromising
                        cryptographic materials. Thus far, the only people that NSA had sent for
                        consultation were those about to retire.</p>
                    <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0006"/>
                    <p>Nancy Smith pointed out that it was not hard to get additional briefings for
                        special access if a specific person were designated for the purpose.
                        Humphrey wondered whether raw intercepts mattered unless they affected
                        policy. Since President Johnson received raw intercepts, these should be in
                        the LBJ Library. Kimball said that the Committee needed to prove to agencies
                        that “we’re not the bad guys.” Humphrey pointed out that intercepts could be
                        vital for coverage of the USS <hi rend="italic">Liberty</hi> and USS <hi
                            rend="italic">Pueblo</hi> incidents. Nancy Smith noted that some should
                        be in the LBJ Library, but agency clearance would still be required.</p>
                    <p>Slany then turned to action items from the February meeting. The first of
                        these was the Committee’s request for stationery. The Department was aware
                        of this request. The matter was still under advisement, but the Committee
                        would probably have stationery by the time of the next scheduled
                        meeting.</p>
                    <p>Leffler then brought up a joint State–NARA letter seeking guidelines on
                        declassification of National Security Council records. Nancy Smith said that
                        the Presidential Libraries were seeking guidelines for clearance of NSC
                        materials. NSC had not yet received the request, guidelines would take a
                        long time to prepare, and the impact of the new executive order had to be
                        considered. At present, the Presidential Libraries had the advisory records
                        and NARA had the administrative records. The Clinton administration was
                        declaring all NSC documents to be Presidential and exempt from FOIA.
                        Herschler said that Presidential Library materials would be subject to
                        mandatory review. Smith replied that agencies had not given the Libraries
                        the authority to declassify top-level documents.</p>
                    <p>Kimball raised the issue of reviews of <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> volumes by outside scholars. Slany indicated that the
                        Office had no way at the moment of finding funds for contracts for such
                        reviews. The only available consultants for such reviews were currently
                        active-duty senior Foreign Service officers.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="publication-of-japan-chapter">
                    <head>Publication of Japan Chapter in <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations,</hi>
                        1961-1963, Volume XXII</head>
                    <p>Kimball then turned to the next agenda item, a discussion of the publication
                        of the 1961–1963 Northeast Asia volume without the chapter on Japan.
                        Officials at the highest levels of the executive branch had advised the
                        postponement of the discussion of this issue for a period of time. The
                        Committee was not happy about this delay. It is clear that this is an
                        important issue that will create precedents for the entire issue of access
                        and clearance. But the Committee is convinced that this is not a bad faith
                        request. It is being actively discussed by officials at the highest levels
                        of the Executive Branch. The Committee feels that it is the right thing to
                        do to give those officials a little more time. So the Committee will come
                        back for a special meeting early in June to assess the response it expects
                        to get by that time.</p>
                    <p>Schaller asked what the Committee would do if it received a negative response
                        that seriously omitted documents the Committee felt were important. Kimball
                        said that the Committee had made clear what the necessary parameters were in
                        terms of documents to be included. If a response came back that was a
                        partial or full negative, the Committee would be able to discuss this at its
                        special meeting in June.</p>
                    <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4" facs="0007"/>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="planning-for-publication-of-the-record">
                    <head>Planning for Publication of the Record of the Nixon and Ford
                        Administrations</head>
                    <p>The Committee reconvened at 10:45 a.m. and took up the issue of planning for
                        the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes that will cover the
                        Nixon and Ford administrations. Kimball asked Slany to address the
                        issue.</p>
                    <p>Slany responded that the Historian’s Office has been working with Nancy Smith
                        of the Office of the Presidential Libraries of the National Archives and
                        would schedule a meeting in May with Stan Mortenson, the lawyer representing
                        the Nixon estate, concerning the critical issue of access to the Nixon
                        documentation. He noted that he had not yet talked to John Taylor, Director
                        of the Nixon Library, about access. He pointed out that the Presidential
                        Records Act of 1977 did, of course, give the Archivist the responsibility
                        for granting access to the Nixon records.</p>
                    <p>Slany stated that what must be done first is define the scope of the volumes.
                        The structure and emphasis of the proposed volumes had been discussed within
                        HO, and draft outlines of 25 volumes had been developed for each of the
                        periods covering the first 4 years of the Nixon administration and the
                        subsequent Nixon/Ford administration. Slany stated that he felt the scope of
                        the coverage proposed was what HO resources could accommodate. It was
                        slightly less than for the Johnson years, which will have 35 volumes
                        covering 5 years.</p>
                    <p>Slany asked the Committee for suggestions. He noted that the volume outlines
                        in the briefing package came out of discussions in the Office among the
                        senior FSOs assigned to HO and was based on their professional sense of the
                        importance of events. He asked whether the lists of proposed volumes struck
                        a proper balance in terms of geographic and topical emphasis.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that the Committee has been reluctant to offer the type of
                        specific advice HO was seeking. Experts on the foreign policy of the Nixon
                        administration were available and might be hired to comment on the planning
                        process for the volumes envisioned. Slany stated that HO was seeking only a
                        general sense of guidance from the Committee.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg commented on the outline of volumes proposed for the first 4 years
                        of the Nixon administration: one volume for Latin America and one volume for
                        Africa seemed inadequate. She also pointed out that she saw a need for a
                        compilation on information policy; Herring agreed with Rosenberg that one
                        volume for Latin America was inadequate.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that he was glad to see a proposed volume on the global economy.
                        In his view, transnational issues will demand increasing consideration in
                        the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series. He thought that the oil
                        crisis of the 1970s might bring this requirement to the fore.</p>
                    <p>Herring pointed to the significance of a remark made by David Patterson that
                        the list of volumes was necessarily prepared without consulting the
                        documentation upon which they would be based. Rosenberg observed that any
                        proposed framework of volumes would evolve as the compilers proceed with
                        their research.</p>
                    <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0008"/>
                    <p>Slany stated that National Archives requirements relating to preparing and
                        processing the records require preliminary planning for the volumes, even if
                        the emphasis later changes. Nancy Smith supported Slany’s observation
                        concerning the need for preliminary planning, particularly with respect to
                        the Nixon documentation, which is involved in legal complications that might
                        require NARA to review the documents for restrictions other than national
                        security restrictions before HO historians see them.</p>
                    <p>Hogan observed that <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes tend to
                        define the field of diplomatic research. Graduate students typically begin
                        their research by consulting <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        volumes. With that in mind, he wondered whether it might not be important to
                        circulate the proposed schedule of volumes to recognized experts in the
                        field. Kimball said that Hogan’s suggestion was sound, but more appropriate
                        after HO research had refined the list.</p>
                    <p>Davis commented that in dealing with the Nixon administration, it will be
                        necessary to take Kissinger into account, and he advised compilers to read
                        Kissinger’s writings. Pointing out that the State Department became less and
                        less a central player in the formulation of foreign policy, he suggested
                        that compilers will have to range further afield into the records of other
                        agencies. Foreign policy material might have to be researched at state and
                        local levels.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that legislation governing the preparation of the <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series limited the foreign policy
                        concerns documented in the volumes to the federal level. He also observed
                        that research into the records of other agencies and in private collections
                        had enriched the volumes in recent years.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp turned the Committee’s attention to the problems relating to gaining
                        access to the Nixon and Kissinger materials. Kimball pointed to the report
                        to the Committee which indicated that HO is in the process of negotiating
                        for access to these materials. Herring asked whether Kissinger’s records as
                        National Security Adviser are at NARA or the Library of Congress. William
                        Cunliffe, Director of the Nixon Presidential Historical Materials Project,
                        stated that the Kissinger materials are at the Library of Congress and NARA
                        is in the process of providing finding aids on the Nixon materials, which he
                        thought included material concerning Kissinger’s role as National Security
                        Adviser.</p>
                    <p>Slany noted that to some extent this is a resource issue. The Department is
                        now providing $80,00-90,000/year in subsidies to the LBJ Library to
                        facilitate priority State access without hindering non-governmental
                        researchers, and may have to provide even more to NARA to subsidize work on
                        the Nixon records.</p>
                    <p>Nancy Smith said that no partial processing has been done on the Nixon
                        records. Such processing must be completed before HO compilers can begin
                        their research in the records. Kimball asked when NARA would be able to do
                        this. Cunliffe responded that the requirements of <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> research will provide the impetus to the processing.
                        Nancy Smith added that resources from the State Department will be necessary
                        to deal with the problem. The Nixon Project includes thousands of boxes in
                        the national security files, and processing the many hours of tapes will be
                        an immense job.</p>
                    <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6" facs="0009"/>
                    <p>Herring noted that processing at the LBJ Library had begun in the 1970s, and
                        he expressed concern about the later start with! the Nixon documentation.
                        Nancy Smith noted that under the statute, NARA was supposed to give priority
                        in processing to Watergate material, but that they were getting to the end
                        of that project. Humphrey observed that the National Security File at the
                        LBJ Library is about one third the size of that in the Nixon Project.</p>
                    <p>Kimball expressed concern about the impact of these problems on the <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series. He felt there was a
                        pressing need for more detailed planning, and he asked how HO and NARA
                        planned to attack the problems of access and processing.</p>
                    <p>Herring seconded Kimball’s concerns. Kimball asked Smith if NARA had a plan
                        to meet these concerns. Smith stated that helpful contacts with HO had begun
                        to define <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> needs in terms of files,
                        tapes, and other materials to be researched. Kimball asked if HO historians
                        could consult finding aids to the Nixon records. Smith responded with a
                        qualified yes, although some of the finding aids, such as the one relating
                        to the audiotapes, are issues under litigation. HO needs to work out the
                        access problem with Mortenson.</p>
                    <p>Kimball indicated that he was uneasy without a well-defined action plan.
                        Leffler asked if HO had written to Nixon’s lawyers Slany responded that he
                        had, but no meeting had been arranged. He pointed out that overall access to
                        the Nixon records will be defined by the Archivist of the United States. The
                        Nixon estate retains the right, however, to preview any material made
                        available to researchers, in order to meet the concerns of the estate with
                        respect to privacy matters. HO’s concern is to reach agreement with the
                        lawyers representing the estate that <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> is a valid official project, thus facilitating research
                        without the necessity of prior review of materials.</p>
                    <p>Smith observed that precedent had been established by other official
                        historians doing research in the Nixon documentation on this basis. She
                        added that nothing on the scale proposed by HO had been undertaken.</p>
                    <p>Kimball again expressed concern about the lack of a detailed action plan for
                        research scheduled to begin as early as next year. He said that the
                        Committee could not play a part in addressing the complex problems involved
                        in gaining access without such a plan.</p>
                    <p>Slany said that he is asking the Committee whether the HO plan for the Nixon
                        volumes will provide adequate coverage. Leffler commented that he did not
                        think the proposed list of volumes would affect the access issue. No matter
                        how many volumes there were, HO would need to see all relevant foreign
                        policy materials.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked when the letter concerning access had been sent to Mortenson.
                        Slany responded that it had been sent last month, and he had talked to
                        Mortenson this month. Mortenson is currently involved in litigation, and
                        negotiations with HO are necessarily affected by his other commitments.</p>
                    <p>Nancy Smith said that NARA is more than willing to assist in preparing the
                        kind of plan Kimball was asking for. She noted, however, that because of
                        pending litigation <pb n="7" xml:id="pg_7" facs="0010"/> relating to the
                        Nixon materials, it is difficult for NARA to take written positions on
                        problems such as HO access to the materials.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="new-executive-order-on-national-security-information">
                    <head>New Executive Order on National Security Information</head>
                    <p>Kimball turned the discussion at this point to the recently released
                        Executive Order 12958 on national security information.</p>
                    <p>Ken Walters of the Bureau of Diplomatic Security briefed the Committee on the
                        implementation of the order and the implications for the Department of
                        State. He reviewed the salient aspects of the order and noted that the State
                        Department will respond to the order, in part, by stipulating that
                        classification be kept to the lowest possible level. Guidelines concerning
                        this had yet to be developed. Walters stated that a new panel will be
                        established for classification appeals. National interests will be weighed
                        against public interest with the assumption that as much as possible should
                        be released. Walters noted that the State Department has until mid-October
                        to meet certain requirements stipulated in the executive order. He expected
                        the Department to be in full compliance with the order by the beginning of
                        next year.</p>
                    <p>Kimball commented that the executive order did not include everything the
                        Committee thought was important but it did reflect some of the Committee’s
                        concerns.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg asked about documents that had been previously reviewed and denied
                        declassification. Would these documents be reconsidered for release under
                        the new executive order? Will everything be opened up that is older than 25
                        years?</p>
                    <p>Walters referred these questions to Frank Machak. Machak observed that there
                        were reasons that documents were initially denied declassification, and they
                        will not automatically be declassified as a result of the new executive
                        order. Machak asked for Committee input in fashioning a plan for
                        implementation of the executive order. He noted that the State Department
                        had gone from reviewing 1 million pages of documentation a year to 4-1/2
                        million pages. The Department hoped to increase that pace to 9 million pages
                        a year to meet the requirements laid down in the new executive order. This
                        posed a daunting challenge.</p>
                    <p>Machak said that a new environment exists partly because of the costs
                        involved in generating and maintaining classified documentation, giving an
                        obvious impetus to the orderly process of declassification. He noted that
                        there is an interagency working group addressing the issue of automatic
                        declassification. Machak hoped to have the Committee’s concerns in hand,
                        even in the form of a preliminary checklist, when the interagency working
                        group begins to meet next week.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked what avenues the Committee could pursue to make certain its
                        concerns were factored into planning for the implementation of the executive
                        order. He stated that the Committee had definite positions, which had been
                        previously enunciated, that should be taken into consideration. He asked who
                        was in charge of the planning. Walters replied that Assistant Secretary for
                        Diplomatic Security Quainton was in charge.</p>
                    <p>Leffler asked for Machak’s perspective on implementing the executive order.
                        Machak briefly outlined the parameters of what he felt was possible
                        concerning <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0011"/> declassification. A major
                        concern of his was that the Department might get bogged down in working on
                        materials of marginal importance to the foreign policy record. Machak would
                        welcome the Committee’s suggestions for priorities for the declassification
                        process.</p>
                    <p>The Committee adjourned for lunch at noon.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="closed-session-may-11">
                <head>CLOSED SESSION, May 11</head>
                <p>Kimball opened the afternoon session by stating that the agenda needed to be
                    revised to include a report on the new executive order and the report of the
                    Committee on the opening of Department of State files after 30 years instead of
                    discussion of the Nixon tapes. Picker reported that the subcommittee on the
                    Legal Adviser’s records was not yet ready to present its report, but would do so
                    the following morning. Kimball turned to the subcommittee on the opening of the
                    Department of State records after 30 years for its report.</p>
                <div xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-opening">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on Opening the Department of State’s 30-Year
                        Old Records</head>
                    <p>Rosenberg reported that the four-member subcommittee visited Archives II. The
                        subcommittee had a tour, sampled withheld documents, and met with Tony
                        Dalsimer. The members were impressed with the number of files that had been
                        reviewed and with the streamlined review process now being used, since it is
                        faster and more rational than the process used earlier. The subcommittee
                        received a report of the progress made and the members were amazed at the
                        large numbers of documents that had been declassified.</p>
                    <p>The subcommittee decided to look at some of the withheld documents. Using a
                        list of the open lot files for 1961 to 1963, the members selected some file
                        titles that they determined would have high research interest. They found
                        that one lot file had a 40 percent withholding rate. They then looked at the
                        files and the withheld documents themselves to attempt to determine any
                        problems.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg then listed the subcommittee’s suggestions and recommendations on
                        the entire matter. She noted that, according to Dalsimer, the guidelines
                        promised from the Department of Defense were almost completed, and the
                        subcommittee’s first recommendation was to get those guidelines. The second
                        recommendation was to pursue the CIA equity issue. The Committee has
                        repeatedly asked CIA to send someone in authority to the Archives to review
                        documents with CIA equity. According to the minutes of the last Committee
                        meeting, Frank Machak said that he would pursue that matter, and he has done
                        so.</p>
                    <p>Machak then commented on a meeting scheduled for the last Wednesday of the
                        month, May 31, with CIA officials, at which those issues raised by the
                        subcommittee would be reviewed. All the appropriate counterparts would be at
                        the meeting and were anxious to review the problem. Rosenberg reiterated
                        that the Committee wanted a CIA official with authority to declassify to
                        become involved in the process. Kimball noted that he spoke with John
                        Pereira at CIA, who said that solution makes sense. He also spoke with Jack
                        Wright on the phone about 3 to 6 months ago. Wright also said he would give
                        the Committee a decision, but so far nothing has been done.</p>
                    <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0012"/>
                    <p>Machak repeated that all the appropriate people would be at the meeting,
                        including Pereira. He (Machak) and his staff would attend and do what they
                        could to improve the situation. He also noted that problems will arise from
                        any approach, and whether the rule applies to 25 or 30 years makes no
                        difference.</p>
                    <p>Dalsimer mentioned and read from a section of a letter from Leo Hazlewood,
                        Executive Director of CIA, to Kimball in which Hazlewood commented that
                        there are no guidelines for CIA equity. Dalsimer suggested that CIA was not
                        willing to provide guidelines.</p>
                    <p>Schaller pointed out that when reviewing the withheld documents at Archives
                        II, a particular problem was revealed. Often, numerous documents were
                        packaged together, and even though the CIA content within the group of
                        documents was small, the entire file was withheld because all the documents
                        were bound together and considered as a unit.</p>
                    <p>Leffler added that often the solution to that problem would be as simple as
                        unfastening a staple or removing documents from a binder. Some of the
                        packages they saw had many Department of State memoranda that were still
                        classified because of the practice of keeping all documents together.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg said the subcommittee’s third recommendation was that these files
                        be re-reviewed, since the binders or packages can be broken down and the
                        documents separated. The subcommittee wanted the files to be reviewed again
                        after the DOD guidelines are received.</p>
                    <p>With regard to the documents in binders, Dalsimer mentioned that a few weeks
                        ago there was some discussion of not treating the package as one document.
                        Marvin Russell interjected, however, that some pages in a binder, like those
                        from the NSC, are kept together. Dalsimer went on to say that State
                        reviewers at NARA are already taking these packets apart and, if researchers
                        request a review, they will re-review the documents after the DOD guidelines
                        are received.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg went on to the subcommittee’s fourth recommendation: a good list of
                        the open files has been prepared; that and future lists should be given to
                        the Committee regularly, perhaps on a quarterly basis. The list would be
                        distributed to the constituent organizations.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said he had a copy of the list and would pass it around so the other
                        Committee members could see it.</p>
                    <p>Davis asked if the lists are classified, and Rosenberg replied that the lists
                        are open and fully accessible to everyone. They can and should be put on the
                        Federal Bulletin Board, Internet, and distributed in other forms to reach a
                        wide audience.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Rosenberg to give some thought to the ways this information
                        could be disseminated and to develop a procedure to do so. Van Camp
                        indicated that she thought NARA already has a procedure to disseminate the
                        information, and Rosenberg mentioned that one of the primary ways the
                        information was publicized was in the SHAFR Newsletter.</p>
                    <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0013"/>
                    <p>Kimball suggested that NARA handle the distribution, rather than make the
                        Committee responsible for dissemination of the information. Michael Kurtz of
                        NARA suggested that it could go out on the Internet. Kimball was receptive
                        to the suggestion, indicating that the Committee could discuss the matter.
                        Hogan expressed his view that the SHAFR Newsletter was probably the best
                        resource for publicizing the information.</p>
                    <p>Leffler turned again to a discussion of the files. He looked at an S/P lot
                        file of 46 boxes, of which 16 were still withheld. He said that the portion
                        still classified was usually given by a percentage of the whole, but to say
                        that 3 percent or so was still classified was very misleading because it
                        masked the fact that it is usually the most significant documents that
                        remain classified. Many of the documents in this lot file, which covered the
                        years 1948-1963, are from the late 1940s and early 1950s, and some of them
                        continue to remain classified.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted the problem is one of differences in the standards used. As the
                        standards for declassification change, the older documents are usually not
                        re-reviewed. Leffler pointed out, however, that the documents he spoke of
                        were re-reviewed in December 1994, but even so 16 of 46 boxes were still
                        classified. Rosenberg noted that those documents from the 1940s and 1950s
                        were in the files primarily from 1961-1963.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked about the subcommittee’s sense of the standards of review.
                        Leffler admitted that it was difficult to draw any conclusion. He used as an
                        example a group of documents bound together in a thick file. One of the
                        documents had a paper clip at a quote taken from a CIA document. That the
                        documents were bound together and that one had a CIA reference seemed to
                        determine that the whole file would not be declassified. Overall, Leffler
                        indicated he was disappointed by the results of the declassification process
                        as evidenced by the fact that 16 of 46 PPS boxes remained closed after
                        review.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that Dalsimer was nodding his head in agreement to that
                        comment, indicating that the problem was the packaging of documents. Leffler
                        concluded that little could be said about standards of declassification at
                        this point.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg noted that there were some documents that had been withheld because
                        of Department of State exception, but it was rare. She concluded the report
                        of the subcommittee. The other members had no additional comments to
                        make.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Dalsimer if the minutes of the meeting would be sufficient to
                        request that documents be unpackaged or unbound and then be re-reviewed.
                        Dalsimer said that the minutes would be accepted as the Committee’s request.
                        To be certain the record was unambiguous, Kimball stated that the Committee
                        requests a re-review of the individual documents contained in packages that
                        are broken apart.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="nara-comments-on-the-executive-order">
                    <head>NARA Comments on the Executive Order on National Security Information and
                        Access to Records at the Presidential Libraries</head>
                    <p>Kimball introduced Nancy Smith and Michael Kurtz from NARA for comment on the
                        new executive order and access to records at the Presidential Libraries.</p>
                    <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0014"/>
                    <p>Kurtz began by addressing the provisions of the new executive order that
                        required review of 466 million documents over the next 5 years. Based on
                        past experience with bulk declassification orders, the agencies will need
                        help to get through the documents. During the 5-year period of review, the
                        agencies would look to NARA for guidance and assistance. The goal is to
                        review 15 percent of the documents each year for 5 years.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz informed the Committee that on June 8 NARA will host an interagency
                        meeting on how to handle declassification under the provisions contained in
                        the new executive order. NARA would encourage an interagency team approach.
                        There will also be an open forum at the SHAFR meeting in Annapolis on
                        declassification. NARA is also in contact with the Society for Military
                        Historians and will be in touch with any other group that can offer insight
                        and recommendations on implementation of the order.</p>
                    <p>NARA is also going to prepare a declassification database. The plans now call
                        for setting up a system called GILS&#x02014;Government Information Locator
                        System. The government is currently working on this, and NARA will tie its
                        database into the GILS database. NARA and other agencies are training on
                        GILS.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz noted that NARA has a good working relationship with the Department of
                        State and other agencies as well as with the military. All sides are
                        concerned about implementing the new executive order and want to work
                        together on it. He mentioned <hi rend="superscript">:</hi> that there was a
                        CIA-sponsored conference on declassification and the executive order last
                        week, which he attended.</p>
                    <p>After some brief comments in which Kimball indicated he was gratified to see
                        that the 15-percent-per-year policy was retained in the executive order,
                        Rosenberg expressed concern about the Committee members’ constituencies. In
                        her view scholars will assume that documents are now on the new executive
                        order standards when they are not, and she asked if there had been any
                        discussion about reviewing older documents.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz stated that all documents 25 years old or older must be re-reviewed,
                        according to the new executive order. Nancy Smith concurred, saying that the
                        executive order must cover all old material.</p>
                    <p>Regarding that situation, Machak expressed some concern about the other side
                        of the problem: where to stop in the re-review process. He merely raised the
                        question at this point, but could not offer any recommendations or
                        conclusions yet. He thought there might be a period of time for a mandatory
                        review, perhaps 2 years. He commented that the Committee could raise this
                        question in order to focus attention on it and that procedures could be
                        tailored to meet the specific problem.</p>
                    <p>Smith noted that there was a question regarding how those documents slated
                        for mandatory review were to be handled. Documents not in an exempted
                        category must be open after 25 years; all others must be reviewed. She
                        explained that at present material in Presidential Libraries being held for
                        classification reasons is reviewed first and then opened. The Office of
                        Presidential Libraries is working closely with the Office of the National
                        Archives on the process. A lot of material could be in one of nine exempted
                        categories and both offices are trying to remove some of the exempted
                        categories, such as the World War II category or JFK assassination
                        documents. They are also looking at <pb n="12" xml:id="pg_12" facs="0015"/>
                        country files where the status of a country has changed, such as Vietnam.
                        These matters need to be worked out with the Office of the National
                        Archives, but money is a problem. In any event, documents withheld because
                        of classification will be reviewed first.</p>
                    <p>Smith continued by pointing out that a framework has to be developed for
                        older documents, and agencies will be notified that they have to review
                        them. She suggested a two-pronged approach: 1) on-site reviews, and 2)
                        interagency review teams formed to conduct the reviews. The Presidential
                        Libraries have been contacted, and some, such as the Reagan Library, have
                        already replied in support of the approach. Smith also mentioned that the
                        libraries want more comprehensive guidelines, but in general those
                        guidelines usually apply to lower-level documents. She pointed out that the
                        NSC conducted on-site reviews at the Eisenhower Library with good
                        results.</p>
                    <p>Kimball mentioned that he recently spoke with the Director of the Eisenhower
                        Library, who said that he had about 2,700 files that cannot be declassified.
                        Smith said she thought the Library had about 5,000 or 6,000 pages that were
                        not declassified.</p>
                    <p>Kimball returned to the question of World War II documents and noted that
                        they posed a problem because of other agency or foreign government equity.
                        He asked whether agencies could be told to come and review the documents by
                        a certain date or they would be opened.</p>
                    <p>Machak said the government did not work that way. Kimball responded that
                        apparently the Archives does. He asked Smith if the new Archivist of the
                        United States would support on-site review. Smith answered that the issue
                        will certainly be addressed by the new Archivist. He is willing to give
                        agencies sufficient review time, and the Presidential Libraries will have to
                        comply with the newly-mandated guidelines for opening records. Kurtz
                        stressed that the approach would be one of cooperation rather than
                        confrontation.</p>
                    <p>Smith stated that the new executive order does not address certain material,
                        such as RD and formerly RD material, and guidelines will be required for
                        that material. Smith suggested that guidelines from CIA and NSC would be
                        helpful. Switching to the Johnson Library audiotapes question, Smith
                        responded to Kimball’s questions that HO is funding two positions at the LBJ
                        Library to work on the tapes. Ultimately, the tapes will be available to the
                        public.</p>
                    <p>David Humphrey noted that the LBJ Library is not pursuing HO interests in the
                        tapes to the exclusion of others. It works on specific time periods
                        suggested by HO, but the Library then reviews all the tapes in that time
                        span.</p>
                    <p>Smith then moved to the Nixon Library. She pointed out that the idea of the
                        Nixon lawyers and agents presenting a major hurdle is probably an
                        exaggeration. On small official requests for access, the Office of
                        Presidential Libraries has made progress with these agents. The lawyers
                        would probably want to review material after it was selected. Problems would
                        arise on a document-by-document basis rather than on the larger question of
                        access. Smith also reiterated the notion that foreign policy was Nixon’s
                        main interest and therefore also his lawyers’, and they would want the
                        material to be used.</p>
                    <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0016"/>
                    <p>Van Camp asked Kurtz about the government-wide database on declassified
                        documents provided for in the E.O. and if such documents were being
                        described, or is the goal only to provide government-wide tracking of the
                        declassification status of documents.</p>
                    <p>Kurtz answered that it was hard at this point to say exactly what the
                        ultimate purpose and shape of the database would be. The GILS system would
                        indicate the nature of the different systems in place among the various
                        agencies. Whether the system will grow into a broader, more responsive
                        on-line one will depend on priorities and especially resources.</p>
                    <p>Machak stated that the Department of State database is document-oriented,
                        which is not necessarily what scholars need. A document-by-document index
                        for millions of pages may not be the best use of money.</p>
                    <p>Kimball advised the Committee to give Nancy Smith an indication of their
                        support for on-site review procedures. George Chalou stated that the
                        Department of Energy conducted on-site review and it worked well, proving
                        that it could be done. Smith observed that the Iran-Contra declassification
                        project at the Department of Justice involved an interagency review team
                        with each agency representative having the power to declassify.</p>
                    <p>Machak reminded the Committee of the Federal budgetary problems and the
                        travel and other costs of on-site review. He also stated that drop-dead
                        dates to agencies just did not work. Smith disagreed, stating that on-site
                        review can be very cost-effective for highly selective and focused files.
                        Kurtz again stressed that the new executive order needed interagency
                        cooperation to succeed. Smith said that her fear was that agencies would
                        wait until the end of the 5-year period and then try for total exemptions of
                        whole files.</p>
                    <p>Leffler stated that that NARA should send quarterly statements on what has
                        been declassified to the SHAFR Newsletter. Kurtz agreed and said they can be
                        disseminated on Internet as well.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="planning-for-foreign-relations">
                    <head>Planning for <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> Volumes Documenting
                        the Nixon and Ford Administrations</head>
                    <p>The discussion then shifted to planning for the Nixon/Ford volumes. Herring
                        wondered if it would be useful for the Committee to approach the Nixon
                        lawyers. Slany answered that officially NARA was responsible for providing
                        access. Nixon agents were allowed a privacy review. He did not want Nixon’s
                        lawyers insisting on pre-review of documents before HO saw them. Kimball
                        suggested that the Committee was at Slany’s disposal.</p>
                    <p>Slany questioned whether HO should be approaching Nixon’s lawyer Stan
                        Mortenson before making a request to NARA. Davis suggested that he approach
                        the Nixon lawyers, and if that did not work, then the Committee could focus
                        on the problem. Van Camp suggested a two-pronged approach.</p>
                    <pb n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0017"/>
                    <p>Schaller commented that the ideal solution would be that HO be given carte
                        blanche from the Nixon lawyers, to which Slany agreed. Kimball added that
                        under any circumstances, Nixon’s agents had the right to review for privacy
                        considerations. Rosenberg suggested that HO use finding aids to establish
                        priorities before getting in touch with Nixon’s agents.</p>
                    <p>Hogan noted that a two-pronged approach by HO and the Committee constituted a
                        plan. Kimball suggested that to justify money for the Nixon Library, the
                        Department needed a plan for research, or at least a strategy, which laid
                        out what assistance from the Committee was needed.</p>
                    <p>Schaller asked if the Library had finding aids and, if so, who produced them.
                        David Langbart explained that they were done at the time of Nixon’s
                        resignation and prepared in great haste.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg raised the issue of vacancies on the HO staff and asked how the
                        Committee could help. Slany suggested that the Committee should reiterate
                        what it had said before. The question of how and what kind of assistance
                        should be given to NARA was another issue.</p>
                    <p>Picker suggested that Slany, Mortenson, and a representative from NARA’s
                        Presidential Libraries Office should meet when the lawyer was available. The
                        idea of sending a letter from the Committee could be shelved at least until
                        then. Slany promised to report on his meeting with the Nixon lawyer and
                        agreed that a letter was not needed yet.</p>
                    <p>Kimball again expressed his concern about the lack of an action plan that
                        took into account both resources and an assessment of the amount and nature
                        of the files to be examined at the Nixon Library. Rosenberg asked if the
                        first Nixon administration’s records, which were approaching 25 years old,
                        were under the provisions of the new executive order. Chalou suggested that
                        they would probably be considered special category material and the order
                        would not apply to them.</p>
                    <p>At this point the meeting adjourned briefly and reconvened at 3:40 p.m.</p>
                    <p>Kimball indicated that he would request information from Nancy Smith and NARA
                        regarding a Mandatory Declassification Group, which, he believes, is a
                        training and study group that deals with standards issues. He wants to be
                        sure that the declassification authority delegated to the NARA by the NSC is
                        being used in the spirit intended.</p>
                    <p>Humphrey noted that the NSC has indicated that, under the new executive
                        order, it no longer needs to see White House documents for declassification.
                        The LBJ Library has already stopped submitting them to NSC.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="declassification-problems-of">
                    <head>Declassification Problems of <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        Volumes</head>
                    <p>Herring stated that the subcommittee report would be short. The Japan issue
                        had already been dealt with. Kimball indicated that the Committee was still
                        looking for a compromise on British Guiana, but it is premature to expect a
                        final resolution until we see the response on the Japan volume. Herring
                        noted that the CIA’s letter on British Guiana left open the possibility of a
                        compromise. Herring also noted that the CIA had established <pb n="15"
                            xml:id="pg_15" facs="0018"/> a review board for covert actions, a panel
                        that would decide when to acknowledge them. CIA recognition of covert
                        actions in British Guiana would resolve the issue.</p>
                    <p>Picker commented that the CIA people with whom they met stated that if CIA
                        acknowledged the covert operation, they would be ready to agree to open all
                        the related documents. Slany indicated that the documents had been referred
                        to the NSC with the request that it overrule CIA. Herschler noted that all
                        the documents in question were State or White House documents with CIA
                        equity. CIA wanted to excise mention of itself and of covert operations.
                        Picker commented that the Agency had changed its position from a “no” on
                        Woolsey’s last day to a position in an April letter that opened the
                        possibility of a retreat. The Committee has been informed that the CIA
                        committee will meet within a week to decide.</p>
                    <p>Davis indicated that the subcommittee on CIA records did not get into the
                        Guatemala issue. Slany noted that HO had collected, with the help of CIA,
                        over 1,000 pages of CIA documents on Guatemala for a supplementary volume.
                        HO will be examining them, looking for other sources, and will seek to clear
                        and add the Guatemala documents originally excised from the 1952-1954 <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volume published in 1984. Kimball
                        stated that HO had gotten involved in an area of interest to the CIA History
                        Staff. HO should discuss with CIA what the respective objectives were so
                        that the two projects didn’t significantly overlap.</p>
                    <p>Rosenberg asked what else would be included in the catch-up intelligence
                        volume. Slany stated that HO had not yet completed its planning. Iran
                        remains to be done, but Guatemala has a higher priority. Rosenberg commented
                        that the volume needed more detailed planning. In particular she wanted to
                        know if it would be limited to the 11 covert actions admitted by
                        Woolsey.</p>
                    <p>Slany stated that staff limits had prevented making great progress. What had
                        been done so far had been the work of senior Foreign Service officers on
                        short-tour assignment to HO. In terms of priorities, HO would have to give
                        greatest attention to Kennedy and Johnson administration volumes. Kimball
                        asked whether some limited amount of staff time could be put into planning
                        at this stage? Slany replied that the Guatemala documentation was extensive
                        enough to argue for a separate volume. Kimball indicated that the Committee
                        would be ready to evaluate a recommendation for a single volume on
                        Guatemala. Slany responded that HO would have a recommendation ready for the
                        next meeting. Rosenberg reiterated her concern about planning for the other
                        intelligence issues on Woolsey’s list.</p>
                    <p>The Committee adjourned for a bresik and reconvened at 4:05 p.m.</p>
                </div>
                <div xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-cia-records">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on CIA Records</head>
                    <p>The subcommittee on CIA records reported on a discussion with CIA officials
                        on access to Agency records. Picker noted that John Pereira of CIA
                        questioned what covert operations had to do with foreign affairs and asked
                        why HO historians needed to know about contingency thinking that was not
                        carried out. On the latter score, the subcommittee members pointed out to
                        Pereira that the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> legislation
                        required that the volumes deal with policy alternatives.</p>
                    <pb n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0019"/>
                    <p>Picker commented that the CIA people showed a surprising lack of
                        understanding of what the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series
                        was all about, were trying to second-guess HO on the historical significance
                        of documents, and were unaware of the <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> legislation, which she found disturbing. Davis, Herring,
                        and Hogan agreed with Picker’s observations.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Slany to put together a concise, straightforward description of
                        the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series for CIA. Hogan indicated
                        that he felt we were just around the corner from learning about all kinds of
                        covert activities. Kimball noted that HO was asking for a serious change in
                        precedent in what CIA reveals.</p>
                    <p>Kimball then asked the Committee to focus on Friday morning’s meeting with
                        CIA people. What issues should be raised? What do we do about the immediate
                        pressing problem of delays in CIA declassification decisions and their
                        impact on the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> publication
                        schedule?</p>
                    <p>Picker asked whether the Committee should write a letter to new DCI John
                        Deutch welcoming him. Davis commented that a letter to Deutch was premature
                        at this stage. Van Camp asked whether the Committee could press CIA on
                        meeting the deadlines provided in the legislation. Slany commented that, if
                        CIA did not respond, this approach would result in publishing the volumes
                        without the CIA material. Van Camp emphasized that the CIA declassification
                        delays were the #1 priority, and the Committee needs to keep pressing the
                        Agency. Kimball stated that the covert action issue was coming to a head. He
                        felt that CIA’s Historical Research Policy Board is going to make a
                        recommendation soon. Any action other than watchful waiting is
                        premature.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked for other questions or issues to raise on Friday with the CIA
                        people. Van Camp suggested asking about how the new executive order would be
                        implemented. Rosenberg proposed raising the issue of CIA’s providing on-site
                        review people with declassification authority. Picker thought the Committee
                        should emphasize again the importance of not duplicating <hi rend="italic"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi> publications. Herring suggested asking for more
                        information about the Historical Records Policy Board. Will it deal with
                        general principles or specific cases?</p>
                    <p>Leffler raised again the issue of writing Deutch. What’s the harm in doing it
                        now? Davis commented that a letter would deny Deutch the opportunity of
                        acting as the Committee would wish without being in a position of reacting
                        to it. Moreover, he wouldn’t read a letter sent in the next month anyway.
                        Hogan stated that something should be done. Picker proposed writing a letter
                        after <hi rend="italic">The Washington Post</hi> has its next article on
                        changes in CIA under Deutch. Hogan commented that the delays in the
                        publication schedule do not allow for a month’s delay. Kimball suggested
                        that the Committee put CIA on report for not meeting the legislatively
                        mandated deadline.</p>
                    <p>After further discussion Kimball proposed asking Bennett Freeman how the
                        Committee should communicate its distress; to CIA. The Committee should
                        express to Freeman its fear that the whole series will be tied up by CIA
                        delays&#x02014;not just by the Japan issue but by the larger issue of covert
                        action. Kimball then read Secretary Donilon’s letter <pb n="17"
                            xml:id="pg_17" facs="0020"/> to Anthony Lake. A lengthy discussion
                        ensued. Slany stated that an oral message to Freeman would be the wisest
                        course.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div xml:id="closed-session-may-12">
                <head>CLOSED SESSION, May 12</head>
                <p>The Committee reconvened at 9:15 a.m. Kimball checked to see whether everyone in
                    attendance was either a State or CIA employee, and then issued the standard
                    warning that the speaker would have the responsibility for identifying the type
                    of information given: open, off-the-record, or classified.</p>
                <p>Kimball asked Slany to distribute copies to the Committee of the newsletter
                    issued by the historical program in the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
                    He also asked the Historian’s Office to assemble a booklet including copies of
                    the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> statute and the Advisory Committee
                    Charter. The booklet would be a “permanent” record that the Committee members
                    could use.</p>
                <div xml:id="access-to-and-declassification-of-cia">
                    <head>Access to and Declassification of CIA Records: Report and Comments by CIA
                        Officials</head>
                    <p>Kimball introduced Brian Latell, Director of the CIA’s Center for the Study
                        of Intelligence, and Kay Oliver, Chief of the CSI History Staff. He asked
                        the four CIA historians to identify themselves: Gerry Haines, Donald Steury,
                        Scott Koch, and Michael Warner (one CIA historian, Kevin Ruffner, was not
                        present). Kimball then asked the Committee members to identify themselves
                        for the benefit of the CIA visitors.</p>
                    <p rend="center">[<hi rend="bold">Begin Classified Discussion</hi>]</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
