<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:id="hac_1995-07-06_minutes_classified_omitted">
    <teiHeader>
        <fileDesc>
            <titleStmt>
                <title type="complete">Minutes of Historical Advisory Committee Meeting, July
                    1995</title>
                <title type="short">HAC Meeting Minutes, 1995</title>
            </titleStmt>
            <publicationStmt>
                <publisher>
                    <date type="created" when="1995-07-06">July 06, 1995</date></publisher>
            </publicationStmt>
            <sourceDesc>
                <p/>
            </sourceDesc>
        </fileDesc>
    </teiHeader>
    <text>
        <front>
            <pb n="[i]" xml:id="pg_i" facs="0001"/>
            <div type="section"
                xml:id="advisory-committee-on-historical-diplomatic-documentation-july-67--1995_1">
                <head><hi rend="bold">Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation July
                        6–7, 1995</hi></head>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Committee Members</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Warren F. Kimball, Chairman</item>
                    <item>George C. Herring, Jr.</item>
                    <item>Michael J. Hogan</item>
                    <item>Melvyn P. Leffler</item>
                    <item>Michael R. Schaller</item>
                    <item>Anne H. Van Camp</item>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Executive Secretary</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Public Affairs, Office of the Historian</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William Z. Slany, Director</item>
                    <item>Paul Claussen</item>
                    <item>Evan Duncan</item>
                    <item>Vicki Futscher</item>
                    <item>Karen Gatz</item>
                    <item>David Geyer</item>
                    <item>David Herschler</item>
                    <item>Susan Holly</item>
                    <item>Nina Howland</item>
                    <item>David Humphrey</item>
                    <item>Donna Hung</item>
                    <item>Ted Keefer</item>
                    <item>Dan Lawler</item>
                    <item>Gabrielle Mallon</item>
                    <item>William Marsh</item>
                    <item>Tom Martin</item>
                    <item>Jim Miller</item>
                    <item>David Patterson</item>
                    <item>Harriet Schwar</item>
                    <item>Luke Smith</item>
                    <item>Jeff Soukup</item>
                    <item>Shirley Taylor</item>
                    <item>Carolyn Yee</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Anthony Dalsimer, Director, FPC/HDR</item>
                    <item>Nina Noring, FPC/HDR</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Bureau of Diplomatic Security</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Cheryl Hess, DS/ISP/APB</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Central Intelligence Agency</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Kay Oliver, Chief, History Staff</item>
                </list>
                <pb n="[ii]" xml:id="pg_ii" facs="0002"/>
                <p><hi rend="bold">National Archives and Records Administration</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>David Langbart, Archivist, Records Appraisal and Disposition
                        Division</item>
                    <item>Nancy K. Smith, Archivist, Office of Presidential Libraries</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Nixon Presidential Historical Materials Project</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>William H. Cunliffe, Director</item>
                </list>
                <p><hi rend="bold">Private</hi></p>
                <list>
                    <item>Page Putnam Miller</item>
                </list>
            </div>
            <pb n="[iii]" xml:id="pg_iii" facs="0003"/>
            <div xml:id="contents">
                <head>Table of Contents</head>
                <table cols="2">
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="bold">Open Session, July 6</hi></cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report by the Historian</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_1">1</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Discussion of the Japan Appeal</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_4">4</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report on the Johnson Audiotapes at the Johnson Library</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_5">5</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>NARA Report on the Nixon Historical Materials Project</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_7">7</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Consideration of the Plan for the Nixon Administration Volumes</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_8">8</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on Declassification Problems</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_10">10</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="bold">Closed Session, July 6</hi></cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on Opening the Department of State’s
                            30-Year Old Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_12">12</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on Retrospective Volumes</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_15">15</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Implementation of the Executive Order on National Security
                            Information</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_16">16</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Executive Discussion of Publication of <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                                Relations</hi>, 1961 -1963 Volume XXII</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_18">18</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Report of the Subcommittee on CIA Records</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_16">16</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell><hi rend="bold">Closed Session, July 7</hi></cell>
                        <cell/>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Comments by the CIA Historian</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_18">18</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Discussion of the Executive Order on National Security
                            Information</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_22">22</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                    <row>
                        <cell>Prefatory Language for 1961-1963 Japan Compilation</cell>
                        <cell>
                            <ref target="#pg_23">23</ref></cell>
                    </row>
                </table>
            </div>
        </front>
        <body>
            <pb n="[1]" xml:id="pg_1" facs="0004"/>
            <div type="section" xml:id="open-session-july-6">
                <head>OPEN SESSION, July 6</head>
                <p>Kimball called the meeting to order at 9:12 a.m. He announced that the
                    Committee’s statement on <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes under
                    appeal would be postponed. Last-minute information might be received, and other
                    members were likely to raise the subject.</p>
                <p>After issuing the usual warning against discussion of classified material during
                    the open session, Kimball turned to approval of the agenda. He hoped that
                    members would be quick and concise with the afternoon’s reports since a long
                    session could be expected with CIA representatives the next day. Slany indicated
                    that Executive Order 12958 might be discussed in the morning, depending on
                    whether the schedule change could be cleared with Hancock. There were no further
                    changes in the agenda.</p>
                <p>The Committee then approved the minutes of the May 18 meeting. Leffler requested
                    an addition to page 10 concerning the subcommittee’s visit to the National
                    Archives. He wanted the minutes to reflect his “disappointment with the results
                    of the declassification process he observed.” Sixteen out of 46 boxes of Policy
                    Planning Staff files were still closed, and another researcher had found little
                    in the boxes that had been processed. Kimball suggested a one-sentence addition
                    to the final version of the minutes.</p>
                <div type="section" xml:id="report-by-the-historian">
                    <head>Report by the Historian</head>
                    <p>Slany began his report on the status of the <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> series. He indicated that 54 volumes had been published
                        since January 1991. Six volumes and a microfiche supplement had been
                        published thus far in 1995, with eight more expected. Although 18 of the 25
                        Kennedy administration volumes would be published by the end of the year, 7
                        would be delayed until next year, and would be 33 years behind. Microfiche
                        supplements were also behind schedule. The first of 35 Johnson
                        administration volumes was scheduled for publication this year, with 15 to
                        follow in 1996 and others expected in 1997. Of the Nixon volumes, 24 or so
                        were expected to appear in 1998-1999, making a 26-to-30 year line feasible.
                        HO should therefore be close to achieving the new executive order’s 25-year
                        mandate.</p>
                    <p>It was unclear what impact the 25-year automatic declassification portion of
                        the new executive order would have on the <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> series, or how it would affect access to documents from
                        other agencies or foreign governments. Our British counterparts were
                        concerned about how their declassification would impact <hi rend="italic"
                            >Foreign Relations.</hi> The British were currently reviewing documents
                        less than 30 years old on a case-by-case basis. They were aware that
                        something would have to be done to shorten the time. A representative of the
                        Foreign and Commonwealth Office would be invited to participate in the
                        autumn Advisory Committee meeting.</p>
                    <p>With respect to the declassification process, Slany indicated that the CIA
                        delays, which had halted declassification for some months earlier this year,
                        were still a problem. Assistant Secretary of State Donilon had indicated
                        that undertakings for the expeditious declassification of <hi rend="italic"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi> documents were in process. On the positive side,
                        Slany had heard that Department policy officers were beginning to reflect an
                        awareness of the need to open records and HO was receiving more positive
                        reviews of its materials.</p>
                    <pb n="2" xml:id="pg_2" facs="0005"/>
                    <p>Staff vacancies over the past year or so, the difficulties of doing research
                        in some areas, and the really ambitious schedule caused a number of volumes
                        to slip beyond goals set last year. Recruitment of new staff members
                        continued; Susan Holly had joined the staff and would bring her historical
                        and State Department experience to bear. Two more historians were expected
                        to join in July, and a fourth later in the summer. The position of Deputy
                        Historian/General Editor had been announced, and Donilon would try to make a
                        selection in August.</p>
                    <p>Slany mentioned that the first <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        volume in CD-ROM format had appeared. Futscher indicated that 1958–1960,
                        volume X, Part 1 was included in the Department’s quarterly CD-ROM
                        publication of foreign affairs documents. Slany noted that the Office
                        intended to include other future volumes in the CD-ROM publication.</p>
                    <p>Slany reported that a pamphlet had been prepared for the Committee that
                        included the texts of the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        legislation and charter. Taylor distributed copies to Committee members. An
                        updated version would be available next March. Advisory Committee stationery
                        would also be available before the next meeting.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked whether there was indeed a logjam in producing the series, and
                        whether the Committee could help. Slany explained that the Office would not
                        be able to put more than 6 or 7 volumes into the publication process during
                        the current fiscal year. This fell short of the schedule to reach the
                        30-year line. With assurances from the CIA, 12 to 15 volumes might be ready
                        next year. Everything depended on CIA. This year, no volumes were cleared
                        for a 3 to 4 month period. Delays made it difficult to deal with the
                        Department’s comptroller when only $178,000 out of $300,000 had been spent.
                        Kimball noted that there was also a publishing backlog. Slany said that he
                        would look into this.</p>
                    <p>Leffler asked whether the Committee had mentioned delays experienced in six
                        cases. Kimball said they had been discussed with Leo Hazlewood at the
                        luncheon meeting and with CIA representatives at the last meeting. The CIA
                        had assigned one person to each case. Still, he intended to check with Kay
                        Oliver to see what had been done. Kimball asked whether the Committee should
                        set a deadline. Herschler said that HO worked with the CIA on a daily basis.
                        Earlier attempts to set deadlines had not worked. CIA was currently clearing
                        up some of the oldest cases.</p>
                    <p>Turning to the issue of staff recruitment, Kimball asked if Slany was
                        satisfied that the situation was improving. Did the Committee need to let
                        out a “primal scream” to get things done?</p>
                    <p>Slany replied that the delays and problems inherent in the personnel process
                        made everyone want to scream. Citing the assistance of Assistant Secretary
                        Donilon, Slany pointed to one positive advance: the recent addition of a new
                        historian, Susan Holly. Other personnel actions, however, had become so
                        bogged down in the bureaucracy that it was often difficult to know when a
                        new employee could start. Slany hoped that the difficulties he had already
                        encountered in hiring employees under Schedule B authority would make it
                        easier to hire similar recruits in the future. But personnel rules were so
                        “bizarre,” Slany concluded, that bringing in new personnel was almost as
                        difficult as declassification.</p>
                    <pb n="3" xml:id="pg_3" facs="0006"/>
                    <p>Kimball asked Slany to let him know if the hiring process stalled so that the
                        Committee could become involved.</p>
                    <p>Kimball took up the action items left over from the May meeting. He wondered
                        what position the Committee should take on new documentation, that is when
                        additional materials became available before the publication of a <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volume. As an example, he cited the
                        continual efforts of the National Security Archive to secure the release of
                        new documents.</p>
                    <p>Slany acknowledged the potential for difficulty: documents were being
                        declassified all the time&#x02014;the National Security Archive itself had
                        filed requests for the declassification of massive amounts of information.
                        Slany said that the Historian’s Office would need help if it were to monitor
                        all of these developments. He also pointed out that the situation, although
                        troubling, had not become serious. Kimball asked to be notified if the issue
                        actually became problematic.</p>
                    <p>Kimball raised the issue of access to records at the National Security
                        Agency. He noted that the NSA had retained David Kahn as “visiting
                        historian,” but that Kahn had refused to submit to a security clearance.
                        Kahn had agreed, however, to act as an intermediary between State and NSA
                        and also offered to arrange a luncheon meeting between Kimball and the new
                        NSA historian.</p>
                    <p>Kimball reminded the Committee that Leffler had proposed a joint State-NARA
                        letter seeking guidelines for NSC documents.</p>
                    <p>Page Putnam Miller explained that FOI requests and declassification
                        guidelines were separate issues. The issue of access to NSC records, on the
                        other hand, was currently in litigation. Nancy Smith interjected that legal
                        briefs had already been filed and the case should go to court in September.
                        Miller recommended that the Committee proceed with a letter asking for
                        declassification guidelines for records 25 years or older.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that the Committee should ask the NSC for guidelines to meet its
                        obligations under the 25-year line mandated by the new executive order.</p>
                    <p>Smith said the new executive order, and its implementing regulations, require
                        each agency to prepare guidelines. NARA had adopted the position that
                        guidelines would only be helpful if they allowed for the declassification of
                        high-level documents. She said that the guidelines should address more than
                        the 25-year requirement; they should also deal with more recent
                        materials.</p>
                    <p>In other words, Kimball concluded from Smith’s comments, the Committee did
                        not need to do anything on the matter. Miller disagreed and encouraged the
                        Committee to become involved now, since the implementation of the executive
                        order would take approximately 5 years.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said that he understood that an inter-agency committee had been
                        convened to consider the development of the guidelines to implement the
                        executive order. Miller replied that the committee had met once already.
                        Smith said there had been several meetings, but she had yet to see an NSC
                        representative.</p>
                    <pb n="4" xml:id="pg_4" facs="0007"/>
                    <p>Leffler recommended that the Committee send a short letter asking what the
                        NSC planned to do to implement the executive order.</p>
                    <p>Miller said the Committee should raise more than the executive order in its
                        letter; it should also complain about the problem of overdue <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes. Leffler explained that the
                        NSC was not responsible for the delays in the clearance of the volumes.
                        Herschler agreed, commenting that all agencies should be as responsive as
                        the NSC had been. Van Camp thought it inappropriate for the Committee to
                        write the proposed letter to NSC at this time.</p>
                    <p>Leffler said he and other members of the Committee had noted how other-agency
                        documents&#x02014;especially NSC, DOD, and CIA records&#x02014;are often
                        withdrawn from the files at NARA due to the absence of agency guidelines. He
                        emphasized that the agencies should institute a program of on-sight
                        collaboration. This justified the Committee’s involvement.</p>
                    <p>Kimball moved to postpone the issue until the Committee received the report
                        from the Van Camp subcommittee. Before proceeding, Kimball remarked that,
                        although a letter might eventually prove worthwhile, it could be awkward for
                        the Committee to become involved now, especially since Steve Garfinkel at
                        ISOO was already pushing the agencies to issue guidelines by October.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked if the practice of separating document packages at NARA was
                        still a problem. Dalsimer said that it was not.</p>
                    <p>Kimball mentioned the quarterly reports that NARA published listing recently
                        declassified materials. He wondered whether Mike Kurtz could be encouraged
                        to make these reports available to researchers on the Internet.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp asked if there were a connection between the NARA quarterly reports
                        and those issued by HDR. Dalsimer explained that the efforts were similar,
                        but that HDR released its report through the Bureau of Public Affairs.
                        Kimball also recalled that Kurtz had assured the Committee that NARA would
                        seek to disseminate its report more widely, possibly including an uplink to
                        the Internet.</p>
                    <p>Kimball took the opportunity to remind Slany to arrange for the distribution
                        of certain reports from the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="discussion-of-the-japan-appeal">
                    <head>Discussion of the Japan Appeal</head>
                    <p>Kimball moved to discuss the Japan appeal, although he pointed out that
                        formal discussion of the issue had been postponed to the afternoon session.
                        The time had come, he said, for the Committee to make a public announcement
                        on Japan&#x02014;noting at the same time the absence of representatives of
                        the press. Kimball emphasized how much the status of the compilations on
                        Japan and British Guiana concerned not only the Committee, but also the
                        Historian’s Office and the Department at large. A final written response to
                        these appeals remained outstanding, but an oral understanding had apparently
                        been reached.</p>
                    <p>Kimball explained that a formal appeal process had been instituted for those
                        instances when other agencies (i.e., agencies other than State) differed
                        with the Committee’s recommendations to publish certain information in the
                            <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi>
                        <pb n="5" xml:id="pg_5" facs="0008"/> series. A panel had been convened
                        consisting of representatives from State (Donilon), CIA (Slatkin), and NSC
                        (Beers). The members of the panel had agreed to consider, and were in a
                        position to resolve, cases that do not, strictly speaking, fall within the
                        formal mandate of the law. Kimball said the panel had already met to discuss
                        the issues relating to Japan and British Guiana. Although the final vote had
                        not been taken, the Committee expected the eventual response would be
                        positive on British Guiana, negative on Japan. Kimball was quick to praise
                        the State Department, especially the constructive and energetic role played
                        by Donilon. He also reported that the new Director of Central Intelligence
                        apparently intends to communicate to the Agency his desire to move toward
                        greater openness. Kimball was reluctant to characterize the tentative
                        agreements any further, except to say that the Committee considered these
                        actions a step in the right direction.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said the final step in the process would be to decide how the
                        Committee should respond, especially to the expected negative response on
                        Japan. There were several alternatives that the Committee would consider
                        during its closed session; Kimball assumed that an official position would
                        be taken before the end of the meeting.</p>
                    <p>Hogan wondered whether the Committee could get confirmation of the DCI’s
                        intention to issue a directive on the Agency’s new openness policy.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Slany to gather the necessary intelligence on the CIA
                        directive. Kimball then remarked that the Committee had heard many positive
                        statements from the DCI in the past, but had yet to see these statements put
                        into practice. One could speculate about who had the ultimate authority to
                        declassify; but if the openness policy were to succeed, it would have to be
                        implemented throughout the Agency&#x02014;and the declassification process
                        at the CIA invariably included the Directorate of Operations.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="report-on-the-johnson-audiotapes-at-the-johnson-library">
                    <head>Report on the Johnson Audiotapes at the Johnson Library</head>
                    <p>Kimball then called on David Humphrey to provide an update on the processing
                        of the tapes of the Johnson telephone conversations. Humphrey reported that
                        he had listened to about 150 conversations relating to Vietnam 1966. HO now
                        has tapes for about 300 conversations for the period 1966-1967 and has
                        received the first installment of about 400 conversations from the first
                        half of 1964 covering such issues as Panama, Brazil, Cyprus, and Cuba. HO
                        has requested 500 additional phone conversations covering portions of 1964,
                        1965 (including the intervention in the Dominican Republic), and 1968. A
                        total of 1,200 conversations have been requested out of 7,000.</p>
                    <p>Humphrey indicated that thus far the tapes HO has received are exactly what
                        we want, and nothing seems to be missing. Occasionally the Johnson Library
                        has added a conversation not requested if the archivist thinks it may be of
                        interest. Some excisions have been made, although these are infrequent; they
                        deal exclusively with personal or privacy issues. Accompanying information
                        sheets identify the excisions, which appear on the tapes as a “beep.”</p>
                    <p>Humphrey reported that the quality of most of the tapes is quite good,
                        especially compared to the meeting tapes, because the telephone
                        conversations are between only two people. There are some exceptions to
                        this, most notably Arthur Goldberg, who sounds <pb n="6" xml:id="pg_6"
                            facs="0009"/> like his telephone is “in a closet.” He noted that most of
                        the conversations are arriving at HO after the compilations have been
                        drafted and are then inserted in the draft, which is not the most desirable
                        way to use the tapes. Future volumes, however, will use these conversations
                        heavily during the compiling process, such as the volumes covering Vietnam
                        for 1967 and 1968. He intends to use about 20 of the 150 conversations for
                        Vietnam 1966, including 4 in their entirety. Most of these conversations are
                        with McNamara and Rusk.</p>
                    <p>In terms of substance, Humphrey said, the tapes do not contain “bombshells,”
                        but they are important in that they keep Johnson in the picture. Because
                        Johnson wrote no memoranda, the tapes are a unique source in describing how
                        Johnson interacted with people and the advice he received. McNamara is
                        especially useful in placing immediate issues in a larger policy context.
                        There is a substantial amount of political discussion, and the tapes also
                        reflect Johnson’s preoccupation with the press.</p>
                    <p>Herring asked if the process was working well.</p>
                    <p>Humphrey replied that the Johnson Library was following the schedule fairly
                        well, although they were a little behind on processing the 1964 tapes. He
                        expressed concern that as more HO historians listen to the tapes and request
                        transcripts, more time of the two State-paid archivists would be consumed,
                        thus reducing the time available for processing tapes and handling other <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> research priorities.</p>
                    <p>Leffler inquired if other HO historians are listening to the tapes. Jim
                        Miller said that he had listened to several tapes concerning Cyprus and was
                        “stunned” by how good they are and how focused the discussion is. They fill
                        significant gaps in the written record, particularly on high-level
                        consideration of policy options. There are detailed briefings by McNamara
                        and Rusk. The problem is how to adequately annotate these discussions, since
                        it is impossible to print everything.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that HO needs to take steps to ensure that the historians are
                        using these tapes, and consider how the tapes will affect those volumes
                        already compiled and typeset. It’s a problem of integrating new information
                        into the older volumes. Humphrey said that for some volumes there will not
                        be significant new material; HO is trying to focus on the relatively small
                        number of volumes where there is “meaty” material.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that the Cyprus volume already has been typeset. Slany said
                        that that volume is being held up in page proof to allow time to evaluate
                        the possible addition of telephone conversations. Miller indicated that the
                        Cyprus volume is also held up by declassification issues. Leffler said that
                        it seems useful to hold up some volumes to add important materials from the
                        conversations.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp inquired whether it would be possible to include the actual recorded
                        conversations in a <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> CD-ROM. Kimball
                        said that this was a good idea, but perhaps that might be more a matter for
                        the Johnson Library to produce. Nancy Smith commented that the Johnson
                        Library was nowhere near ready to release the major portion of taped
                        telephone conversations to the public. Van Camp said she was just talking
                        about using relevant conversations or small audio bites in <hi rend="italic"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi> on CD-ROM.</p>
                    <pb n="7" xml:id="pg_7" facs="0010"/>
                    <p>Smith asserted that it is not NARA’s policy to make transcripts of telephone
                        conversations, that transcripts are being prepared at the request of the HO
                        historians by the two archivists paid by the State subvention. It takes 100
                        hours to transcribe 1 hour of conversations. Given the possible impact on
                        other <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> research support at the
                        Library, she suggested that HO and the Committee prioritize the list of
                        tapes to be transcribed for the volumes.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Smith to let HO and the Committee know if the transcription of
                        conversations for HO has such an impact on other <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> research at the Johnson Library. He said the Committee
                        expects some kind of answer about the inclusion of selected recorded
                        conversations or parts of conversations on CD-ROM. Slany said that HO would
                        explore that.</p>
                    <p>Hogan inquired if the tapes provide new information or just Presidential
                        input to issues documented elsewhere. Humphrey responded that it is both.
                        Much of the information supplements written documentation, but there is a
                        substantial amount of unique information, particularly on LBJ and
                        Congress.</p>
                    <p>Resuming the meeting after a break, Kimball announced that he had obtained
                        copies of the announcement for the Deputy Historian position and distributed
                        copies to other members of the Committee. He then moved on to the next
                        agenda item, planning for the Nixon volumes.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="annex-1_1">
                    <head>NARA Report on the Nixon Historical Materials Project</head>
                    <p>Nancy Smith began her presentation on the Nixon project by informing the
                        meeting that the Nixon project has obtained a set of NSC finding aids for
                        use by Department of State historians. She pointed out that Slany had been
                        in touch with the Nixon people, but had not gotten a response, and NARA will
                        raise the access issue with the Nixon people to get the ball rolling. Slany
                        would attend the meeting. A few members of Bill Cunliffe’s staff had been to
                        the Johnson Library to see how work on <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations</hi> was handled there. A meeting with Governor Carlin on the
                        Nixon project is in the works. Smith noted that NARA wants an official
                        letter from the Department of State outlining its needs for the <hi
                            rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> series. Carlin expects additional
                        resources will be required.</p>
                    <p>So far, Smith continued, State has had no response from the Nixon lawyers,
                        and NARA thinks it is better for NARA to follow; up. Stan Mortenson has been
                        handling the question of special access. Smith noted that NARA is hopeful
                        that negotiating on the Nixon matter will be more successful than continuing
                        litigation. It may not be the optimum approach, but it appears the best way
                        to handle the situation now.</p>
                    <p>Smith encouraged HO historians to come to Archives II and visit the Nixon
                        project to see what is available. The project has the Nixon daily diary,
                        which can be used now.</p>
                    <p>Slany expressed gratitude to Nancy Smith for her help. He pointed out to the
                        Committee that the resource issue will have to be looked at closely. He
                        pointed out that in 1996 and 1997 this project will likely require more
                        subventions for positions at NARA to provide priority processing for
                        documents for the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes and to
                        provide accelerated archival assistance so that Department historians can
                        maintain a <pb n="8" xml:id="pg_8" facs="0011"/> research schedule. Without
                        such subventions all other work by the Nixon Library staff would be blocked
                        Slany noted that HO will need the endorsement and support of the Committee
                        in order to get needed resources. He reported that about $100,000 per year
                        was allotted for work at the LBJ Library and more than that will be needed
                        for the Nixon project.</p>
                    <p>In response, Kimball asked the other members whether they agreed that such
                        resources would be necessary and inquired whether the support would be
                        temporary.</p>
                    <p>To the latter question, Smith explained that NARA had guaranteed that the two
                        positions currently funded by the State Department at the LBJ Library would
                        be permanent jobs. Those employees were told that they could move to the
                        Nixon project. Right now, however, Bill Cunliffe and the Nixon project staff
                        are tied up with litigation and have the new executive order to deal with
                        and to review.</p>
                    <p>Cunliffe noted that he now has two people handling the litigation, but he
                        needs to shift people to other tasks. The problem he faces is the large
                        quantity of material to process. The Library’s National Security File is the
                        second largest of the Presidential libraries. That in itself is a lot of
                        work, and the tapes will cause a problem as well.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked about the type of position that would be offered for someone
                        working with the Nixon materials. Smith explained that the people brought on
                        to work at the LBJ Library are guaranteed a permanent position. That means
                        that they have a job within the NARA system, but not necessarily at one
                        specific location.</p>
                    <p>Kimball then asked about the best way to make the request for funding and
                        personnel. Should the request be made by letter or should it be contained in
                        the annual report? Slany replied that the request should be in a separate
                        document.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that there were no objections to the Committee supporting the
                        request. He then went on to ask about the Kissinger papers. Smith answered
                        that Kissinger material is divided: part of it is at NARA and part at the
                        Library of Congress. Leffler then asked if the Library of Congress had
                        control over that material, to which Slany replied that they think they do
                        and that David Wigdor had promised his help to facilitate access to the
                        Kissinger memoranda of telephone conversations.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section"
                    xml:id="Consideration-of-the-Plan-for-the-Nixon-Administration-Volumes">
                    <head>Consideration of the Plan for the Nixon Administration Volumes</head>
                    <p>Kimball thanked Smith for her report and turned to consideration of the
                        proposed plan for the Nixon volumes. Slany reminded the Committee members
                        that the outline they received was a draft document, prepared by senior
                        Foreign Service officers, not by the HO staff, and was a framework that will
                        undergo further revisions.</p>
                    <p>Herring noted that the proposed Vietnam volume for 1969 should include
                        documentation on Operation Duck Hook, Nixon’s effort to end the war, which
                        involved an NSC group established to study ways to end the war. There should
                        be a section on Duck Hook or on the plans to end the war.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked whether there were any more substantive comments about the
                        plan. He suggested that a more advanced version of the plan be sent out to
                        experts on the <pb n="9" xml:id="pg_9" facs="0012"/> Nixon administration
                        for review and to suggest topics to be included. Slany replied that he was
                        eager to do this.</p>
                    <p>Leffler suggested consideration be given to integrating the volumes on arms
                        control and national security. He explained that arms control discussions
                        were framed in terms of national security and thought it would make sense to
                        follow that pattern within the volume. He also questioned the number of
                        volumes planned, noting that there were only 25 proposed Nixon volumes when
                        there had been 35 Johnson volumes. He asked for the justification for 10
                        fewer Nixon volumes.</p>
                    <p>Slany explained that the 25 volumes covered 4 years; an additional 25 would
                        be prepared for the second Nixon/Ford term.</p>
                    <p>Leffler asked for more information about the factors, aside from budget
                        considerations, that justified the decrease in the number of volumes. Slany
                        replied that the Office probably could not produce 35 volumes; the question
                        is still being examined and the final number of volumes must still be
                        determined. He noted that 25 was an arbitrary number at this point in
                        time.</p>
                    <p>Leffler continued the discussion by noting that the Nixon era was an
                        extraordinary period for foreign policy, and it did not make sense to
                        deflate the series covering the Nixon period even though there are budgetary
                        concerns. He argued that the series needs to be strong and the Advisory
                        Committee must fulfill its requirement to encourage comprehensiveness.
                        Leffler concluded that 25 volumes of fewer pages was not enough.</p>
                    <p>Slany indicated that discussion of the matter would be helpful, and Kimball
                        noted that the discussion occurred against the backdrop of 4 years of
                        diminishing numbers of pages. The number of published pages had been reduced
                        due to budget considerations as well as in order to meet deadlines. He asked
                        whether anyone had heard complaints about the series not being as strong or
                        as comprehensive as it should be. Leffler mentioned that he had heard
                        comments to that effect.</p>
                    <p>Slany repeated that he sought advice on the plan and comments on whether
                        particular subjects were adequately covered by the skeletal Nixon plan.
                        Leffler recalled that Emily Rosenberg had mentioned earlier that one volume
                        on Latin America was inadequate. As it now stood, the plan allowed for just
                        a few pages on important areas, such as Chile. After all, HO was planning to
                        publish a supplemental volume with 200 additional documents on Guatemala. In
                        his view, the proposed Latin America volume was an obvious weakness. Herring
                        suggested that assuming the best possible results from CIA, the
                        documentation on Chile would be stupendous.</p>
                    <p>Kimball interjected that the Committee would discuss documents on Guatemala
                        in the 1950s during the afternoon session. Those documents could result in
                        about 200 pages. He also noted that the record of the Nixon administration
                        on Chile could comprise an entire book. He asked the members to assume the
                        best possible results at the CIA and wondered if there would be room for all
                        the documents.</p>
                    <p>Luke Smith provided a compiler’s perspective by noting that no time is gained
                        by reducing two volumes into one. He explained that the research for two
                        volumes could be done in about the same amount of time as that for one
                        volume and noted the selection <pb n="10" xml:id="pg_10" facs="0013"/>
                        difficulties involved in trying to condense into one volume material that
                        should be in two volumes. Kimball accepted Smith’s point, but added that in
                        fairness one also had to consider other factors, such as the time involved
                        in technical editing of two volumes and additional publication costs.</p>
                    <p>With regard to the number of volumes, David Humphrey pointed that the
                        proposed 25 volumes should not be an issue, since the proposal only covered
                        4 years. Even though there were 35 Johnson volumes, they covered a larger
                        time period. He suggested that the proper ratio was about 25 Nixon volumes
                        to about 28 to 30 Johnson volumes.</p>
                    <p>Kimball again mentioned his concern about downsizing the series. He asked how
                        the Committee is to assess when enough is enough and asked for substantive
                        suggestions. In his view, the discussion seemed to be providing anecdotal
                        information only. After Herring and Van Camp briefly commented on adding
                        volumes at a later date, Kimball pointed out that Slany is not a free agent,
                        meaning that resources and time schedules have an impact on forming the
                        series.</p>
                    <p>Slany stated that HO is looking for suggestions on the Nixon series, but that
                        the series cannot expand from 25 to 35 volumes. He asked for concrete
                        suggestions, and considered the possibility of a volume on Chile or two
                        volumes on Latin America as useful advice.</p>
                    <p>Kimball again presented the idea of sending the plan out for review and
                        asking the reviewers to write up a commentary from which HO and the
                        Committee could develop recommendations. Leffler indicated that may be a
                        useful approach. He also said that one volume on arms control was not
                        enough, the two volumes on economic issues omitted important
                        issues&#x02014;they contained no assessment of OPEC during the period, for
                        instance&#x02014;and he suggested that the Middle East should have more than
                        two volumes.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted that the discussion had been helpful, but it needed a more
                        orderly approach. Slany stated that the suggestions made thus far would be
                        incorporated into the plan. In response to Herring’s question, Slany also
                        said that a more complete outline would be available for the next
                        meeting.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked Slany if a member of the HO staff was working on preparing the
                        proposal for the Nixon series. Slany replied in the negative, stating that
                        he worked on it with assistance from the senior Foreign Service experts, but
                        the General Editor would be involved once one was hired. David Patterson
                        added that the HO staff was asked to comment on an earlier draft of the
                        proposal. He also noted that planning the series was an ongoing process, one
                        made more complicated because it had to be done before the documents had
                        been reviewed.</p>
                    <p>After receiving no further comments on the issue, Kimball turned the meeting
                        over to the subcommittee, represented by Leffler and Schaller, to report on
                        declassification problems.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-declassification-problems">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on Declassification Problems</head>
                    <p>Leffler reported that the subcommittee was asked to look at the CIA component
                        of the 1964-1968 volumes on Laos, China, and Africa to see what documents
                        they contained <pb n="11" xml:id="pg_11" facs="0014"/> and to anticipate
                        problems in declassification. The subcommittee was especially interested in
                        new INR intelligence documents. In his view, the documents he reviewed were
                        excellent. He was told that two volumes, Laos and China, were long overdue
                        at the CIA. Leffler repeated his view that the selection of documents in the
                        volumes was excellent, and he suggested sending a letter to CIA stating that
                        a decision on the documents was overdue. It was a mistake for HO to wait
                        indefinitely.</p>
                    <p>With regard to the Africa volume, Leffler reported that the Department of
                        State had already objected to the declassification of nine documents. The
                        HDR reviewers suggested that there was too heavy an emphasis on operational
                        and routine issues. Leffler suggested that the documents be given a closer
                        look, but believed the document selection was well done and the Committee
                        will probably need to fight for release of the documents.</p>
                    <p>Schaller added that he thought the documents gave a dynamic sense of policy,
                        but he realized how they could create problems in declassification. He
                        thought the documentation was important to understanding the flavor of
                        decisions. Leffler recommended activating the timetable for reviews and
                        suggested action now while there is a sympathetic Presidential
                        administration in office.</p>
                    <p>With regard to scheduling, Herschler reported that the issue is on the table,
                        although the decisions are overdue. When Leffler asked about sending a
                        formal letter, Herschler reported that some information was superseded by
                        daily conversations with the appropriate persons at the CIA. He noted that
                        HO had pushed hard for decisions.</p>
                    <p>Slany added that the issue involves the leadership of the Agency and changes
                        that have been implemented in the way documents are declassified. In some
                        cases, documents have been held so new procedures can be applied to them.
                        Kimball added that Donilon had written to CIA about overdue documents.</p>
                    <p>Herring and Leffler inquired into the publication schedule for 1995, and
                        Herschler confirmed that Laos and China were scheduled to be published in
                        1995 and early 1996.</p>
                    <p>Kimball explained the Committee’s understanding that CIA will admit to
                        conducting covert activities in certain countries, more than on the list of
                        11 or 12 named by Woolsey. He also noted the Committee’s belief that CIA’s
                        policy is changing. The Agency will admit it exists and undertakes actions,
                        but still withhold material dealing with current situations and national
                        security issues.</p>
                    <p>Leffler returned to the China, Laos, and Africa volumes. He hoped the CIA
                        will evaluate documents according to its new principles. He suggested,
                        however, that the Committee press the issue with individual volumes to be
                        sure that the principles are applied to specific documents. He repeated his
                        suggestion that a letter be written when declassification decisions are
                        overdue. Kimball added that, if the Committee gets something concrete
                        regarding CIA policy, that information could be included in the letter.</p>
                    <p>Herring asked how many documents were involved. Herschler replied that a lot
                        of documents are being reviewed, but not all of them are problems. He also
                        noted that specific issues are raised by specific documents.</p>
                    <pb n="12" xml:id="pg_12" facs="0015"/>
                    <p>Kimball asked if the Committee wanted to put the Agency on notice. Leffler
                        answered affirmatively, and Herring suggested the Committee do anything that
                        it can. In light of these comments, Kimball asked Slany to write a letter
                        and put the CIA on notice. He also noted that the subject would be discussed
                        with Kay Oliver when she attended the meeting Friday morning.</p>
                    <p>The meeting adjourned for lunch at noon.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session-july-6">
                <head>CLOSED SESSION, July 6</head>
                <div type="section" xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-opening">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on Opening the Department of State’s 30-Year
                        Old Records</head>
                    <p>When the meeting reconvened at 1:55 p.m., Van Camp began her report of the
                        subcommittee on opening of the Department’s 30-year old records. The
                        previous afternoon she and Hogan had visited Tony Dalsimer who gave them a
                        briefing on outstanding issues left over from the last Committee meeting.
                        First, Dalsimer told them that the Department of Defense (DOD) had given
                        authority to Department of State reviewers to declassify DOD “equities” in
                        State documents, and the Department of State reciprocated by giving DOD
                        authority to review and declassify State equities in DOD documents. The same
                        problem applies to documents of each other’s agency. Dalsimer gave Van Camp
                        a memorandum confirming this arrangement.</p>
                    <p>Second, Dalsimer reported to the subcommittee on his reviewers’ re-review of
                        heavily withheld Policy Planning Staff materials, which the subcommittee had
                        found during its previous visit to NARA. The reviewers used the DOD
                        authority and consulted directly as necessary with Department of Energy
                        (DOE) reviewers at NARA. In consequence, the number of withheld boxes had
                        been reduced from 14 <hi rend="underline">boxes</hi> to 64 <hi
                            rend="underline">pages</hi>.</p>
                    <p>Third, Dalsimer told the subcommittee that the members of COCOM had agreed to
                        place the COCOM archives under the custody of the French Foreign Ministry.
                        He gave Van Camp a document describing procedures for access to these COCOM
                        materials. The archives were closed until 1996, and then would be available
                        for public release after 30 years. There was an index to the documents, and
                        the Department of the State Library had a copy. There were also procedures
                        to allow members of COCOM to gain access before 1996. Moreover, he reported
                        mat the Department of Commerce has agreed that Excon documents can be
                        released after 30 years.</p>
                    <p>Fourth, Dalsimer reported Machak and he he had met with Central Intelligence
                        Agency officials but had made no progress on persuading CIA to give State
                        reviewers authority to declassify CIA equity in State documents. He
                        indicated that because of the new executive order, the CIA is creating 100
                        positions to review CIA documents, and the Department of Energy is
                        establishing 60 positions to review DOE documents. Nancy Smith confirmed
                        that these reviewers will have declassification authority.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp expressed concern about other-agency equity in State documents. When
                        State reviewers had completed their review, they had no desire to see the
                        documents again. In their view, it was NARA’s problem. She believed that
                        State should have an interest in getting State documents reviewed and
                        released. Nina Noring remarked <pb n="13" xml:id="pg_13" facs="0016"/> that
                        State documents with CIA equity would be reviewed by CIA if requested under
                        FOIA.</p>
                    <p>Kimball asked whether the new executive order would force this review, or
                        would it allow this problem to fall between the cracks. Van Camp said the
                        Committee should try not to allow this problem to fall between the cracks
                        during the implementation of the new executive order.</p>
                    <p>David Langbart asked whether most of the CIA equity simply involved an
                        acronym. Van Camp and Hogan both replied affirmatively. Hogan added that he
                        and Van Camp spent 40 minutes the previous afternoon looking at other-agency
                        equity in State documents, and most of it was this kind of material.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp continued that Dalsimer told them that Cheryl Hess is the new person
                        in the Bureau of Diplomatic Security responsible for evaluating the
                        implementation of the executive order. She would appear before the Committee
                        in the afternoon. Dalsimer told Van Camp and Hogan that the implementation
                        is behind schedule. A draft implementation plan had been sent to the
                        agencies for comment. Cheryl Hess has this draft, and the Committee can
                        provide input. Comments are due at ISOO by July 21, and week later a new
                        draft should be sent to the agencies. By October 16, a new directive was
                        supposed to be issued, but Van Camp had little confidence that this schedule
                        would be met. She repeated that the Committee should provide input.</p>
                    <p>Kimball remarked that copies of the draft should go to all Committee members,
                        who could read it that evening. A copy would be sent to Emily Rosenberg and
                        Vince Davis who would be put in charge of coordinating a response (just
                        kidding). Van Camp made clear that this draft was not for public release but
                        only for the Committee’s review and comment.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp then summarized Dalsimer’s report on the review of the 1964-1966
                        Central Files over the past 18 months. 1,800,000 pages had been reviewed,
                        3.4 percent of which had to be withheld. The 4.9 percent withheld from the
                        political files was a little higher and might go up some more. An estimated
                        87 percent of the withholdings pertain to CIA equities. State only withheld
                        1 percent. The rate of review is very fast, averaging about 1½ cubic feet a
                        day. David Geyer asked how much of the withheld documentation was foreign
                        government information. Van Camp was not sure but thought it was very small.
                        The State reviewers took a more liberal view now of what constituted foreign
                        government information. Kimball asked how the draft directive applied to
                        non-existing governments, such as the Soviet Union, but Van Camp said that
                        the subcommittee did not discuss this aspect. Herschler remarked that
                        foreign government information was not a significant problem.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp then reported Dalsimer’s concerns about upcoming problems. One
                        involved the decision of the National Security Council not to handle
                        mandatory review requests, which were being returned to the Presidential
                        Libraries, and then were being referred back to the Department of State.
                        Nancy Smith said these documents, 30 years old or older, were referred to
                        State because they had other-agency equity. A letter from the NSC last
                        November explained that the NSC only wanted to review White House
                        institutional files, such as NSAMs. Van Camp said that HDR was hit with more
                        than 100 <pb n="14" xml:id="pg_14" facs="0017"/> cases from the Eisenhower
                        Library in a few weeks, and Dalsimer could not deal with all of them.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said that if the NSC was saying that it had cleared these documents
                        with NSC equities, then they could be released. Smith said the problem was
                        that these documents almost always involved U.S. foreign relations. David
                        Humphrey interjected that the Kennedy and Johnson Libraries already
                        submitted such documents to the Department of State, and thus the problem
                        had to apply only to the Truman and Eisenhower Libraries. Kimball added that
                        if HDR did not review the documents, then they would be released under the
                        new executive order. Smith said that agencies can review about 15 percent of
                        its older documents per year, but nothing in the new executive order, which
                        would require agencies to release these documents after 5 years, said they
                        had to open them earlier. Many of these documents also involved equities
                        from three or four agencies. The problem was the requesters who will have to
                        wait for a decision on these documents until the problem is resolved. State
                        guidelines up to 1963 existed, but they did not cover documents at this high
                        level. In other words, Kimball interjected, the important stuff.</p>
                    <p>Kimball then asked how the Committee should address this problem. Van Camp
                        responded in jest that subventions should be given to the Department of
                        State. Smith said the Committee should write the Archivist, State, and the
                        NSC, expressing the Committee’s concern and asking them to get together and
                        honor mandatory review requests submitted by researchers.</p>
                    <p>Kimball continued by asking whether Dalsimer had opened the box of documents
                        received from the Eisenhower Library. Van Camp said he sampled the documents
                        but concluded that the problem should be handled by NARA. When Herring asked
                        what the cases involved, Hogan said there were 1,300 cases. Smith added that
                        she had no delegation of authority in writing to review these cases. Kimball
                        thought that language could be added to the guidelines that would resolve
                        the problem. Smith said that Dalsimer felt that NARA had authority to
                        declassify the documents, and she repeated that all she needed was authority
                        in writing to declassify. Kimball asked whether Dalsimer could provide
                        this.</p>
                    <p>Smith also wanted specific guidance such as authority to release contracting
                        documents. She planned to meet with Dalsimer on the issue. When Kimball
                        asked Noring if she would be seeing Dalsimer, she said she would and he was
                        supposed to meet with the Committee this afternoon. Smith said she would
                        like a memorandum for the record of what Dalsimer has said on this question.
                        Kimball believed that Dalsimer or HDR has the authority to review these
                        documents, and Dalsimer could provide the guidelines. Smith commented that
                        she wished Dalsimer was at this meeting. Her supervisor was prepared to go
                        back to the NSC on this question.</p>
                    <p>Van Camp concluded by reporting Dalsimer’s concern about the growing number
                        of tapes to be reviewed and declassified from the Johnson and Nixon
                        Presidencies. The same problem of resources existed, and she wondered how
                        the review of and access to these audio records should proceed.</p>
                    <p>Hogan remarked he had nothing to add to Van Camp’s report.</p>
                    <pb n="15" xml:id="pg_15" facs="0018"/>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="report-of-the-subcommittee-on-retrospective-volumes">
                    <head>Report of the Subcommittee on Retrospective Volumes</head>
                    <p>Kimball then turned to the issue of retrospective volumes, which he and
                        Herring had considered the previous afternoon. Herring said the basic
                        question was: Do we do them? More specifically, do we cover the covert
                        actions relating to Iran, Guatemala, and Indonesia in the 1950s? Yesterday
                        the PA/HO student interns had given them a briefing on Guatemala. The
                        subcommittee was persuaded that the new documents uncovered at the CIA
                        significantly changed the story and thus argued strongly for some such
                        volume. We don’t know yet what the story will be for Iran and Indonesia.</p>
                    <p>Kimball noted also that the interns believed that the new documents on
                        Guatemala do change the story, and Slany agreed. Kimball again asked how
                        this should be handled. He felt catch-up volumes should be restricted to
                        volumes compiled before the 1991 law, i.e., before the Office of the
                        Historian had access to CIA collections. He did not want to leave a loophole
                        for delay (as in the case of Japan). There were truly smoking guns in these
                        documents.</p>
                    <p>Schaller asked how much resistance there was to retrospective volumes.
                        Kimball did not know. He thought there were political reasons, not
                        declassification problems, working against them, although these were
                        sensitive documents that would not be easy to clear. Herring noted that the
                        CIA was engaged in a similar project on Guatemala, and HO’s effort in this
                        area might push the CIA along. Slany mentioned that there would be a
                        conference on the question. The rules have changed, and not just policy
                        documents but operational issues are included.</p>
                    <p>Kimball confirmed this assessment. Guatemala involved seat-of-the-pants
                        policy and execution. Leffler said that this was really the thesis of the
                        book, <hi rend="italic">Shattered Hope.</hi> It is already public knowledge
                        so it is not a smoking gun. The only difference was that now it was
                        confirmed by CIA documentation.</p>
                    <p>Kimball continued that the Committee still has to consider the broad question
                        of retrospective volumes. Van Camp asked how many volumes might be involved.
                        Kimball repeated that there should be time limits, say, from the Eisenhower
                        through the Kennedy administrations. Langbart said you had go back at least
                        to NSC 10. Kimball replied, all right, back to 1948, so the volume or
                        volumes could cover 1948-1963. The Johnson administration involved a
                        different set of issues. It would be an impossible task to cover all African
                        episodes, for example.</p>
                    <p>Hogan indicated that he favored retrospective volumes with the following
                        understandings. First, declassification differences would always be pursued
                        and aggressively so. The agencies must know this (i.e., they do not in fact
                        stand to gain as much as some fear by stalling). Second, denials should be
                        linked to specific reasons of a temporal nature so that when that nature
                        changes (as with a change in foreign government leadership), the document in
                        question becomes open automatically. The Committee should constantly revisit
                        these issues (the clock was ticking all the time) to see if documents can be
                        released and published.</p>
                    <pb n="16" xml:id="pg_16" facs="0019"/>
                    <p>Kimball said there were two competing issues. Referring to his letter to the
                        Committee on the retrospective volumes, he reminded the Committee of the law
                        setting target dates for publication within 30 years. If we constantly went
                        back, we would divert HO resources from meeting the 30-year goal.</p>
                    <p>Hogan asked what the intelligence issues were, and Kimball said they were
                        Iran, Guatemala, and Indonesia. Leffler said the Kahan (?) introduction
                        mentions Burma, Cambodia, Laos, and Eastern Europe. Keefer noted it did not
                        involve Africa, which did not yet have independent states in the 1950s.</p>
                    <p>Leffler offered a dissenting view. He said that we did not go back to the
                        1920s to look at foreign economic policy (Treasury records, for example),
                        which were not used in the <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> volumes,
                        so perhaps we should just send a signal on Guatemala. A proper sense of
                        balance and practicality should lead HO to concentrate on declassifying
                        documents and publishing citations rather than printing the documents in
                        full. Herring pointed out, however, that the advantage with Guatemala was
                        that we already had the documents in hand.</p>
                    <p>Kimball then read his letter to the Committee in extenso. He added that we
                        had in hand 200 manuscript pages on Guatemala, which was great, but we
                        should not compile it. Perhaps we should do about 35 pages on each of six or
                        ten operations in a <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> supplementary
                        volume. Hogan said he was not sure this was practical because a lot of work
                        would be involved. Keefer added that there would be a premium on annotation
                        to show how these small numbers of documents fit into the larger story, and
                        Harriet Schwar commented that it would be a labor-intensive operation,
                        involving a lot of research time and expertise.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said he was proposing less than what Hogan was proposing but somewhat
                        more than what Leffler wanted. Hogan noted that the expectations today were
                        not the same as those of the 1920s. He conceded to the practicality of
                        Kimball’s suggested approach, however, noting that a cost-benefit analysis
                        points toward the sensibility of a full volume rather man a shorter one. The
                        utility would be far greater despite the negligible difference in
                        expense.</p>
                    <p>Kimball said we already had a lot of documents on the issues, so it would not
                        be as labor-intensive as one might suggest. He also felt a special
                        responsibility for releasing documents on Guatemala and Iran because these
                        issues were what led to the creation of the Committee. Hogan agreed.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section"
                    xml:id="implementation-of-the-executive-order-on-national-security-information">
                    <head>Implementation of the Executive Order on National Security
                        Information</head>
                    <p>Kimball next welcomed Cheryl Hess of the Bureau of Diplomatic Security and
                        asked her to make any comments she could on the implementation guidelines to
                        the new executive order. She replied that she was new to the DS/ISP/APB
                        Chief’s position and did not have the benefit of any history working with
                        the Committee. She explained that based upon her understanding of the
                        Committee’s concerns that Frank Machak of IM was in the best position to
                        address any issues concerning declassification. Kimball noted the need for
                        the Committee to have further talks with Frank Machak on his views and
                        suggested he would try to set up an appearance for Friday. When Hess,
                        responding to <pb n="17" xml:id="pg_17" facs="0020"/> Kimball’s question,
                        said she had not seen the Committee’s initial response to the executive
                        order, Kimball gave her a copy of his letter to Assistant Secretary
                        Quainton.</p>
                    <p>After some further general discussion of Hess’ role, Leffler expressed his
                        feeling that implementation of the executive order was of great interest to
                        the Committee and to HO. Kimball agreed and reiterated his desire to get
                        Machak’s views. Hess agreed this was an excellent idea. The Committee then
                        discussed the question of categories of information under the executive
                        order that agencies could exempt from automatic declassification. Nancy
                        Smith and Herschler indicated that whole categories could be excluded from
                        automatic declassification and even from systematic declassification review
                        if the files have not been designated as “historical” (i.e.,
                        “archival”).</p>
                    <p>Leffler responded that this was a very serious issue. Committee members
                        wanted to make intelligent comments, but they did not understand the
                        executive order, and nobody was present to explain how Machak viewed it
                        Committee members agreed that some representation needed to be made to State
                        Department representatives on the issue of exemption from the automatic
                        declassification provisions of the executive order. Slany also mentioned the
                        constituency of the advisory panel as an issue. He urged the Committee to
                        make its positions known quickly as work on State recommendations had to be
                        completed by late July.</p>
                    <p>Kimball commented that the Committee should hear Machak’s views but also
                        should make its comments independent of his views. He then explained to Hess
                        that the Committee was opposed to any action by the Department of State that
                        would set up automatic categories of file exemptions (“a monstrous
                        loophole”) for its own records and requested that she keep the Committee
                        informed of the progress of discussions both within the agency and in the
                        interagency drafting committee.</p>
                    <p>Slany asked for clarification of NARA’s position, noting that he had the
                        impression from a NARA meeting he and Herschler attended that NARA had
                        recommended that three categories of State records be created, one of which
                        would be exempted from automatic declassification. Smith, however, said this
                        was mixing up things. She said that NARA’s objective was simply to get
                        agency recommendations on how they wanted to deal with declassification of
                        their records (page-by-page, automatic, or a limited page-by-page review)
                        but had not made any recommendations. This was different from the issue of
                        file exemptions. Herschler said the effect was the same, and Smith disagreed
                        again. They were different, she argued, because anything not reviewed in the
                        next 5 years would be automatically declassified. It was different if the
                        CIA and DOE, for example, exempted whole files from review. She added that
                        she had been informed that some agencies had prepared lists of file
                        exemptions.</p>
                    <p>When Leffler expressed his concern at the language of the executive order,
                        Kimball replied that the Committee had already fought and lost the issue of
                        exemptions in the executive order and could not recover that territory, but
                        could continue the fight against exemptions at the implementation level
                        through the Department.</p>
                    <p>The meeting then adjourned for the day.</p>
                    <pb n="18" xml:id="pg_18" facs="0021"/>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="executive-discussion-of-publication-of">
                    <head>Executive Discussion of Publication of <hi rend="italic">Foreign
                            Relations,</hi> 1961-1963, Volume XXII</head>
                    <p>During the executive session that followed, the Committee took two votes that
                        it wished recorded in the minutes of the meeting:</p>
                    <list>
                        <item>
                            <p>1) A proposal to publish the 1961–1963 Northeast Asia volume without
                                the Japan compilation and with an explanatory statement failed by a
                                vote of 3 to 2.</p></item>
                        <item>
                            <p>2) A proposal to publish the volume with the Japan compilation, with
                                citations for the three denied documents and a statement of the
                                Advisory Committee’s comments on the comprehensiveness of the
                                volume, passed by a vote of 4 to 1.</p></item>
                    </list>
                    <p>The Chairman did not vote.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
            <div type="section" xml:id="closed-session-july-7">
                <head>CLOSED SESSION, July 7</head>
                <div type="section" xml:id="comments-by-the-cia-chief-historian">
                    <head>Comments by the CIA Chief Historian</head>
                    <p>Kimball opened the Friday morning session at 9:15 a.m. and noted that since
                        matters relating to CIA were on the agenda, the session should be regarded
                        as classified. He invited Kay Oliver to begin the proceedings.</p>
                    <p rend="center">[Begin Classified Discussion]</p>
                    <pb n="[19]" xml:id="pg_19" facs="0022"/>
                    <p rend="center">[End Classified Discussion]</p>
                    <p>After a break, the Committee reconvened at 10:50 a.m. A draft of a letter to
                        CIA reflecting the Committee’s concerns over the pace of clearance actions
                        on <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations</hi> manuscripts was considered and
                        revisions proposed. Kimball noted, with regard to dealings with the CIA,
                        that he had chatted during the coffee break with Oliver and had assured her
                        that the Committee did not want to sabotage the publication program she had
                        outlined She suggested cosponsorship of a retrospective <hi rend="italic"
                            >Foreign Relations</hi> volume dealing with intelligence operations.
                        Kimball thought that such a volume produced jointly by the CIA and the State
                        Department might be a good idea. Hogan supported the idea. Kimball suggested
                        that while this possibility should be discussed with CIA, the option of a
                        retrospective volume should be maintained.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="discussion-of-the-executive">
                    <head>Discussion of the Executive Order on National Security Information</head>
                    <p>Kimball then turned to the concerns he had about Executive Order 12958 on
                        classified national security information. He found no criteria for the
                        selection of the members of the public policy board. He was concerned about
                        the possibility of a broad application of the file exemptions provided for
                        under the order. He stated that he would like to see a mandate for
                        interagency cooperation on implementation of the order.</p>
                    <p>Dalsimer indicated that the Department of State had supported such a mandate
                        in interagency negotiations but had been overruled. He encouraged the
                        Committee to go on record in favor of such a mandate.</p>
                    <pb n="23" xml:id="pg_23" facs="0023"/>
                    <p>Kimball took up the issue of systematic review requirements under the order;
                        He was concerned by the lack of milestones. Dalsimer assured him that
                        milestones were unnecessary; everything would be automatic. Leffler
                        expressed concern about a comment made earlier by Nancy Smith that entire
                        files could be withheld from review. Dalsimer stated that his reading of the
                        order was that every document must be reviewed or released within 5 years,
                        but he noted that it was possible that NARA’s lawyers had a different
                        reading.</p>
                    <p>Kimball expressed concern about the lack of definitions of such terms as
                        “coherent segment” and “foreign government information.” He said that
                        Committee members should give any further comments to Slany by telephone and
                        Slany would draft a letter based on their comments.</p>
                    <p>Leffler wondered whether the Committee would get an opportunity to review the
                        comments on the order that were being pulled together by Jean Pryor and
                        forwarded to Cheryl Hess.</p>
                </div>
                <div type="section" xml:id="prefatory-language-for-1961-1963">
                    <head>Prefatory Language for 1961-1963 Japan Compilation</head>
                    <p>Kimball turned to consideration of the prefatory statement to be included
                        with the Japan compilation in <hi rend="italic">Foreign Relations,</hi>
                        1961-1963, volume XXII, Northeast Asia. He emphasized that the statement
                        should be placed at the beginning of the compilation rather than in the
                        preface. Kimball read his draft of the statement. Hogan thought something
                        should be included about the rationale for withholding the documents.
                        Kimball thought they should stick to a basic statement of fact. Keefer
                        pointed out that there were two categories of documents withheld for
                        different reasons. Slany said there would also be a statement in the
                        preface.</p>
                    <p>The Committee thought the statement at the beginning of the Japan compilation
                        should refer to the statement in the preface and vice versa. After further
                        discussion the Committee agreed to the text of a statement that reads as
                        follows:</p>
                    <quote rend="blockquote">
                        <p>The Office of the Historian prepared a compilation for Japan, 1961-1963,
                            of 62 documents. Despite full use of the appeal process, 7 documents
                            were denied declassification (see the Preface, p.). The Advisory
                            Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation has examined those
                            documents and concluded that this published compilation does not
                            constitute a “thorough, accurate, reliable documentary record of major
                            United States foreign policy decisions,” the standard set by Public Law
                            102-138 of October 28, 1991 (22 USC 4351, <hi rend="italic">et
                            seq.</hi>). The Advisory Committee will continue to seek
                            declassification of the withheld documents.</p></quote>
                    <p>The Committee adjourned at noon.</p>
                </div>
            </div>
        </body>
    </text>
</TEI>
